===== 0002764213479366.pdf =====
TITLE_META: ABS479366.indd
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 20
American Behavioral Scientist
57(10) 1510
 
–1529
© 2013 SAGE Publications
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav 
DOI: 10.1177/0002764213479366
abs.sagepub.com
Article
Learning Analytics: Ethical 
Issues and Dilemmas
Sharon Slade1 and Paul Prinsloo2
Abstract
The field of learning analytics has the potential to enable higher education institutions 
to increase their understanding of their students’ learning needs and to use that 
understanding to positively influence student learning and progression. Analysis of 
data relating to students and their engagement with their learning is the foundation 
of this process. There is an inherent assumption linked to learning analytics that 
knowledge of a learner’s behavior is advantageous for the individual, instructor, and 
educational provider. It seems intuitively obvious that a greater understanding of 
a student cohort and the learning designs and interventions they best respond to 
would benefit students and, in turn, the institution’s retention and success rate. 
Yet collection of data and their use face a number of ethical challenges, including 
location and interpretation of data; informed consent, privacy, and deidentification 
of data; and classification and management of data. Approaches taken to understand 
the opportunities and ethical challenges of learning analytics necessarily depend on 
many ideological assumptions and epistemologies. This article proposes a sociocritical 
perspective on the use of learning analytics. Such an approach highlights the role of 
power, the impact of surveillance, the need for transparency, and an acknowledgment 
that student identity is a transient, temporal, and context-bound construct. Each of 
these affects the scope and definition of learning analytics’ ethical use. We propose 
six principles as a framework for considerations to guide higher education institutions 
to address ethical issues in learning analytics and challenges in context-dependent and 
appropriate ways.
Keywords
ethics, framework, higher education, learning analytics
1The Open University, Oxford, UK
2University of South Africa, Unisa, South Africa
Corresponding author:
Sharon Slade, Faculty of Business and Law, The Open University, Foxcombe Hall, Boars Hill, Oxford, UK. 
Email: sharon.slade@open.ac.uk
479366 ABS571010.1177/0002764213479366American Behavioral ScientistSlade and Prinsloo
research-article2013
 at UNIV NEBRASKA LIBRARIES on April 9, 2015abs.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
Slade and Prinsloo 1511
Learning analytics is cited as one of the key emer
ging trends in higher education 
(Booth, 2012; Johnson, Adams, & Cummins, 2012). There remain, however, a number 
of issues in need of further research and reflection (Siemens, 2012), not least of which 
is consideration of its ethical use and practices. In the field of learning analytics, dis-
cussions around the ethical implications of increasing an institution’s scrutiny of stu-
dent data typically relate to ownership of that data and to student privacy issues. 
Although many authors in the field refer to ethical issues, there are few integrated and 
coherent attempts to map ethical concerns and challenges pertaining to the use of 
learning analytics in higher education.
Approaches taken to understand the opportunities and ethical challenges of learn-
ing analytics necessarily depend on a range of ideological assumptions and episte-
mologies. For example, if we approach learning analytics from the perspective of 
resource optimization in the context of the commoditization of higher education (Hall 
& Stahl, 2012), the ethical issues appear different from those resulting from a socioc-
ritical perspective. In addition, learning analytics has evolved from a range of research 
areas such as social network analysis, latent semantic analysis, and dispositions analy-
sis (Ferguson, 2012). Each of these domains has its own, often overlapping, ethical 
guidelines and codes of conduct that address similar concerns such as the ownership 
of data, privacy, consumer or patient consent, and so on.
For this article, we situate learning analytics within an understanding of power rela-
tions among learners, higher education institutions, and other stakeholders (e.g., regu-
latory and funding frameworks). Such power relations can be considered from the 
perspective of Foucault’s Panopticon, where structural design allows a central author-
ity to oversee all activity. In the case of learning analytics, such oversight or surveil-
lance is often available only to the institution, course designers, and faculty, and not to 
the student (Land & Bayne, 2005).
This article references existing research on learning analytics, adding an integrated 
overview of different ethical issues from a sociocritical perspective. A sociocritical per-
spective entails being critically aware of the way our cultural, political, social, physical, 
and economic contexts and power relationships shape our responses to the ethical 
dilemmas and issues in learning analytics (see, e.g., Apple, 2004). Ethical issues for 
learning analytics fall into the following broad, often overlapping categories:
1.
 The location and interpretation of data
2.
 Informed consent, privacy
, and the deidentification of data
3.
 The management, classification, and storage of data
Such ethical issues are not unique to education, and similar debates relating to the 
use of data to inform decisions and interventions are also found in the health sector 
(Cooper
, 2009; Dolan, 2008; Snaedal, 2002), human resource management (Cokins, 
2009), talent management (Davenport, Harris, & Shapiro, 2010), homeland security 
(Seifert, 2004), and biopolitics (Dillon & Loboguerrero, 2008). Of specific concern 
here are the implications of viewing learning analytics as moral practice, recognizing 
 at UNIV NEBRASKA LIBRARIES on April 9, 2015abs.sagepub.comDownloaded from 

===== 00346543074001059.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 52
 http://rer.aera.net
Research
Review of Educational
 http://rer.sagepub.com/content/74/1/59
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.3102/00346543074001059
 2004 74: 59REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
Jennifer A Fredricks, Phyllis C Blumenfeld and Alison H Paris
School Engagement: Potential of the Concept, State of the Evidence
 
 
 
Published on behalf of
 
 American Educational Research Association
and
 http://www.sagepublications.com
 can be found at:Review of Educational ResearchAdditional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 http://rer.aera.net/alertsEmail Alerts: 
 
 http://rer.aera.net/subscriptionsSubscriptions:  
 http://www.aera.net/reprintsReprints: 
 
 http://www.aera.net/permissionsPermissions: 
 
 http://rer.sagepub.com/content/74/1/59.refs.htmlCitations: 
 
 What is This?
 
- Jan 1, 2004Version of Record >> 
 at Scientific library of Moscow State University on December 2, 2013http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from  at Scientific library of Moscow State University on December 2, 2013http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
Review of Educational Research
Spring 2004, Vol. 74, No. 1, pp. 59–109
School Engagement: Potential of the Concept,
State of the Evidence
Jennifer A. Fredricks
Connecticut College
Phyllis C. Blumenfeld
University of Michigan
Alison H. Paris
Claremont McKenna College
The concept of school engagement has attracted increasing attention as repre-
senting a possible antidote to declining academic motivation and achievement.
Engagement is presumed to be malleable, responsive to contextual features,
and amenable to environmental change. Researchers describe behavioral,
emotional, and cognitive engagement and recommend studying engagement as
a multifaceted construct. This article reviews deﬁnitions, measures, precursors,
and outcomes of engagement; discusses limitations in the existing research;
and suggests improvements. The authors conclude that, although much has
been learned, the potential contribution of the concept of school engagement
to research on student experience has yet to be realized. They call for richer
characterizations of how students behave, feel, and think—research that could
aid in the development of ﬁnely tuned interventions.
KEYWORDS: motivation, school engagement, self-regulated learning.
The concept of school engagement has attracted growing interest as a way to ame-
liorate low levels of academic achievement, high levels of student boredom and dis-
affection, and high dropout rates in urban areas (National Research Council & Institute
of Medicine, 2004). Some studies examine how contexts interact with individual
needs to promote or undermine engagement (Connell, 1990; Eccles & Midgley,
1989; Skinner & Belmont, 1993). Others explore how classroom instruction and
tasks can heighten intellectual engagement (Newmann, 1992; Newmann, Wehlage,
& Lamborn, 1992). Yet others investigate the relationship between school engage-
ment and dropping out (Finn & Rock, 1997; Wehlage, Rutter, Smith, Lesko, &
Fernandez, 1989).
There are historical, economic, theoretical, and practical reasons for the growing
interest in school engagement. Historians note a general decline in respect for author-
ity and institutions among students; one consequence, they argue, is that students can
no longer be counted on to automatically respect and comply with the behavioral and
academic expectations imposed by teachers and school administrators (Janowitz,
1978; Modell & Elder, 2002). As portrayed in recent popular books, students view
59
 at Scientific library of Moscow State University on December 2, 2013http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 

===== 007_Djoni_OK.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Effect of Students' Activities on Academic Performance Using Clustering Evolution Analysis
AUTHOR_META: Djoni Haryadi Setiabudi and Michael Santoso
PAGES: 11
CommIT Journal 17(2), 209–219, 2023
Effect of Students’ Activities on Academic
Performance Using Clustering Evolution
Analysis
Djoni Haryadi Setiabudi 1∗ and Michael Santoso 2
1−2Informatics Department, Petra Christian University
Surabaya 60236, Indonesia
Email: 1djonihs@petra.ac.id, 2santosomichael94@gmail.com
Abstract—Educational data mining is a technique to
evaluate educational process of university students, es-
pecially in their early stages. Most preliminary studies
focus on observing courses undertaken by students from
one semester to the next to predict their success rate.
However, besides studying, many students are also in-
volved in non-academic activities, which tends to affect
their grades. Therefore, the research aims to determine
the effect of student activities on grades while taking into
account their academic activities. The method used for
clustering is K-Means. Data are collected by observing
students’ activity patterns in lectures. The research is
conducted in two study programs at Petra Christian
University: Business Management and Architecture. The
results show that the K-Means method gives good results.
The clusters formed from the data show non-homogenous
groups and produce insights from several groups. The
results show a tendency for students’ performance to
increase along with the number of activities and points
earned. Most students have increased activities during
busy times in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth semesters.
The peak is between the fifth and sixth semesters. Then,
it starts to decrease in the seventh and eighth semesters.
Therefore, students’ activities in the Business Manage-
ment study program affect performance significantly.
Meanwhile, in the Architecture study program, it has
an insignificant effect on performance.
Index Terms —Students’ Activities, Academic Perfor-
mance, Clustering Evolution Analysis
I. I NTRODUCTION
U
NIVERSITIES or tertiary institutions culturally
differ from both primary and secondary academic
levels. It is mainly distinguished by the rules and
freedom associated with learning patterns [1]. At the
primary and secondary levels, students are required to
comply with various existing regulations and standards.
These regulations and standards govern their dress,
Received: Oct. 08, 2022; received in revised form: March 6, 2023;
accepted: April 10, 2023; available online: Sept. 08, 2023.
*Corresponding Author
appearance, and lessons to be taken. When students
enroll in the university, they are free to engage in di-
verse activities previously prohibited. This freedom has
positive and negative impacts, although they are trained
to manage their time effectively and independently. It
also involves the selection of activities and associations
that certainly affect their study outcomes. Meanwhile,
the preference for numerous non-academic activities
and poor time management can affect the students’
scores in that semester [2].
Non-academic activities are also important in univer-
sities because they teach students to build relationships
with other people and develop various soft and hard
skills. Although the tertiary institution mainly focuses
on their graduation and capability to apply the acquired
abilities in the world of work competently. Several
students are complacent with non-academic activities,
affecting their scores. It negatively impacts their confi-
dence level in the subsequent semester, especially those
who are unaware and continue to participate in many
activities.
However, some students have a better adaptation
rate. Therefore, engaging in more non-academic ac-
tivities makes them properly manage their time and
set priorities. It does not affect their scores which will
even improve next semester. Although the activities
differ among universities, proper analysis is needed
to understand the balance between non-academic and
academic activities of students. It ensures an increased
success rate in studies and helps universities to produce
more quality students with non-academic skills.
The previous studies conducted [3–10] focus on
determining the academic performance of undergrad-
uates. The majority of these studies state that the
observation process can be assisted using data min-
ing [3–7, 9, 11–15], and clustering [3, 5, 11, 12, 14]
techniques. Some studies state that the data used to
evaluate performance are the scores realized from the
Cite this article as: D. H. Setiabudi and M. Santoso, “Effect of Students’ Activities on Academic Performance
Using Clustering Evolution Analysis”, CommIT Journal 17(2), 209–219, 2023.
courses offered [3–9, 15, 16]. These analyses also
focus on the initial study [3–6, 17] period. The progress
is realized from one cluster to another during the study
period [3, 13], and its effect on the probability of
dropping out is observed further [4, 6, 10, 15, 17, 18].
Several studies have been carried out on data mining
in education. However, it is better known as edu-
cational data mining. The discussions and analysis
involved utilize large datasets in the field of education
to predict the students’ success or failure, especially in
the early stages of their undergraduate studies. Gener-
ally, the focus of attention is the courses offered per
semester. The clustering approach produces a pattern
that can predict the students’ success or failure. Stake-
holders also use it to make several decisions about
implementing policies that can improve the university’s
standards.
Previous research studies the changes in learning
patterns from studying at home in senior high school
and the university level [1]. It examines the psycholog-
ical stresses students face and actions that can support
their mental health and well-being during the transition
to early-level undergraduate studies. However, it fails
to investigate student activities’ impact on yearly per-
formances. Moreover, the reason why undergraduates
usually drop out of university is investigated [17].
It considers variables related to academic and socio-
economic factors influencing dropouts. The results
show that students with the highest risk of dropping
out are those in vulnerable situations, such as low
grades, and those enrolled in a leveling course for an
engineering degree. The university authorities can use
this model to identify possible dropout cases. Next,
the effect of time management on the achievements of
engineering students is examined [2]. It discusses self-
reported time management behavior by these under-
graduates using the Time Management Behavior Scale.
However, it fails to link the students’ success with non-
academic activities and its effect on their Grade Point
Average (GPA).
Next, previous research observes the changes as-
sociated with the courses offered from one semester
to the next while studying at the university [3]. This
process is realized by adopting a modified approach
called profile-based cluster evolution analysis, although
it fails to consider student activities’ impact on learning


===== 1-s2.0-S092523122400969X-main.pdf =====
TITLE_META: From A-to-Z review of clustering validation indices
AUTHOR_META: Bryar A. Hassan
PAGES: 18
Neurocomputing 601 (2024) 128198
Available online 18 July 2024
0925-2312/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
From A-to-Z review of clustering validation indices
Bryar A. Hassan
a , b , * , 1
, Noor Bahjat Tayfor
c
, Alla A. Hassan
d
, Aram M. Ahmed
a
,
Tarik A. Rashid
a
, Naz N. Abdalla
e
a
Computer Science and Engineering Department, School of Science and Engineering, University of Kurdistan Hewler, Erbil, Iraq
b
Department of Computer Science, College of Science, Charmo University, Chamchamal 46023, Sulaimani, Iraq
c
Department of Information Technology, Kurdistan Technical Institute, Sulaimani, Iraq
d
Department of Database Technology, Computer Science Institute, Sulaimani Polytechnic University, Sulaimani, KRI, Iraq
e
Information Technology Department, Faculty of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
ARTICLE INFO
Communicated by
Keywords:
Data clustering metrics
External clustering validation
Internal clustering validation
Cluster validity indices
ABSTRACT
Data clustering involves identifying latent similarities within a dataset and organizing them into clusters or
groups. The outcomes of various clustering algorithms differ as they are susceptible to the intrinsic character-
istics of the original dataset, including noise and dimensionality. The effectiveness of such clustering procedures
directly impacts the homogeneity of clusters, underscoring the significance of evaluating algorithmic outcomes.
Consequently, the assessment of clustering quality presents a significant and complex endeavor. A pivotal aspect
affecting clustering validation is the cluster validity metric, which aids in determining the optimal number of
clusters. The main goal of this study is to comprehensively review and explain the mathematical operation of
internal and external cluster validity indices, but not all, to categorize these indices and to brainstorm sugges-
tions for future advancement of clustering validation research. In addition, we review and evaluate the perfor-
mance of internal and external clustering validation indices on the most common clustering algorithms, such as
the evolutionary clustering algorithm star (ECA*). Finally, we suggest a classification framework for examining
the functionality of both internal and external clustering validation measures regarding their ideal values, user-
friendliness, responsiveness to input data, and appropriateness across various fields. This classification aids re-
searchers in selecting the appropriate clustering validation measure to suit their specific requirements.
1. Introduction
The primary objective of clustering is to identify the inherent pat-
terns within a collection of unlabeled data, where the items within each
cluster are indistinguishable based on a specific similarity measure.
Clustering is a crucial unsupervised categorization procedure that serves
as a foundational component of data mining, which is widely recognized
as one of the primary tasks in data analysis. Clustering is utilized in
various domains, including text mining, bioinformatics, web data
analysis, and data exploration. Data clustering is a sort of unsupervised
learning that does not rely on any pre-existing dataset information.
However, achieving favorable outcomes in clustering algorithms is
contingent upon the input parameters. For example, the k-means algo-
rithm necessitates the creation of a certain number of clusters (k) [1,2] .
In this context, the inquiry is to determine the ideal quantity of clusters.
Currently, there has been a growing interest in the field of cluster
validity index research as a potential solution. Several cluster validities
approaches have been developed in the literature that do not rely on
class information [3] .
Clustering validation is a method employed to identify an optimal
collection of clusters that aligns most well with inherent divisions, or
natural partitions, in a dataset. This methodology does not rely on any
class information throughout the clustering process.
In a broad sense, clustering approaches can be categorized into three
types, namely external clustering validation, internal clustering valida-
tion, and relative clustering validation.
• External clustering validation: It determines comparing the result of
a cluster in terms of an externally provided label. It evaluates the
purity of the cluster depending on the predefined cluster label. It
could be used to find the best clustering algorithm for a particular
dataset.
* Corresponding author at: Computer Science and Engineering Department, School of Science and Engineering, University of Kurdistan Hewler, Erbil, Iraq.
E-mail address: bryar.ahmad@ukh.edu.krd (B.A. Hassan).
1
bryar.ahmad@ukh.edu.krd.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Neurocomputing
journal homep age: www. elsevier.com/ locate/neu com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2024.128198
Received 9 September 2023; Received in revised form 26 June 2024; Accepted 14 July 2024
Neurocomputing 601 (2024) 128198
2
• Traditional internal clustering validation: It assesses the goodness of
the cluster based on the underlying clustering architecture (i.e.,
where prior knowledge of dataset information is not required), such
as the number of clusters and the clustering algorithm that has been
utilized. Fundamentally, it could be applied to reveal the best clus-
tering algorithm and the optimal number of clusters for a specific
dataset.
• Newly proposed clustering validation: The recently introduced
cluster validation indices refer to internal methods for validating
clustering, which have been proposed in recent times.
The number of these indices differs from one source to another.
According to our research from different databases (IEEE Xplore, Sci-
enceDirect, Google Scholar, ACM Digital Library, SpringerLink, and
Scopus), there are approximately forty popular validation cluster
indices. Fig. 1 depicts the different numbers of external and internal
clustering validation indices.
This review work aims to comprehensively analyze and evaluate a
wide range of clustering validation metrics from a to z. This review aims
to provide a detailed overview of each metric ’ s mathematical founda-
tion, strengths, limitations, and practical applications. By exploring the
entire spectrum of available clustering validation metrics, this objective
seeks to enable a deeper understanding of the nuances involved in
assessing the quality and effectiveness of clustering algorithms, thereby
assisting researchers, practitioners, and data scientists in making
informed decisions when selecting appropriate validation metrics for
their clustering tasks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the
clustering algorithms and their validation parameters. On the other
hand, Section 3 includes the most popular internal and external clus-
tering validity indices

===== 1-s2.0-S0952197623001720-main.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 24
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 121 (2023) 105988
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Survey paper
The role of artificial intelligence-driven soft sensors in advanced sustainable
process industries: A critical review
Yasith S. Pereraa,b, D.A.A.C. Ratnaweerac, Chamila H. Dasanayakad, Chamil Abeykoona,∗
a Northwest Composites Centre and Aerospace Research Institute, Department of Materials, Faculty of Science and Engineering, The University of
Manchester, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, Manchester, UK
b Department of Textile and Apparel Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka
c Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Peradeniya, KY 20400, Sri Lanka
d Institute of Business Industry and Leadership, University of Cumbria, Paternoster Row, Bowerham Rd, Lancaster, LA1 3JD, UK
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Soft sensor
Virtual sensor
Sustainable development
Process monitoring
Artificial intelligence
Machine learning
Process industry
Data-driven modeling
A B S T R A C T
With the predicted depletion of natural resources and alarming environmental issues, sustainable de-
velopment has become a popular as well as a much-needed concept in modern process industries. Hence,
manufacturers are quite keen on adopting novel process monitoring techniques to enhance product quality and
process efficiency while minimizing possible adverse environmental impacts. Hardware sensors are employed
in process industries to aid process monitoring and control, but they are associated with many limitations such
as disturbances to the process flow, measurement delays, frequent need for maintenance, and high capital costs.
As a result, soft sensors have become an attractive alternative for predicting quality-related parameters that are
‘hard-to-measure’ using hardware sensors. Due to their promising features over hardware counterparts, they
have been employed across different process industries. This article attempts to explore the state-of-the-art
artificial intelligence (Al)-driven soft sensors designed for process industries and their role in achieving the
goal of sustainable development. First, a general introduction is given to soft sensors, their applications in
different process industries, and their significance in achieving sustainable development goals. AI-based soft
sensing algorithms are then introduced. Next, a discussion on how AI-driven soft sensors contribute toward
different sustainable manufacturing strategies of process industries is provided. This is followed by a critical
review of the most recent state-of-the-art AI-based soft sensors reported in the literature. Here, the use of
powerful AI-based algorithms for addressing the limitations of traditional algorithms, that restrict the soft
sensor performance is discussed. Finally, the challenges and limitations associated with the current soft sensor
design, application, and maintenance aspects are discussed with possible future directions for designing more
intelligent and smart soft sensing technologies to cater the future industrial needs.
1. Introduction
Most of the modern process industries are highly energy intensive
and hence they are responsible for consuming a significant propor-
tion of the annual global energy production. Therefore, process indus-
tries significantly contribute to global warming through the excessive
burning of fossil fuels. Moreover, the waste, by-products, and toxic
gases generated by these industries lead to environmental pollution.
Consequently, global authorities have been imposing tighter environ-
mental rules and regulations over the past decade, and all process
industries across the world are expected to adhere to them. Non-
compliance to these requirements will lead to legal actions being taken
against process industries, an increase in production costs, and re-
duced consumer demand for products. These environmental concerns,
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: yasith.perera@manchester.ac.uk, yasiths@uom.lk (Y.S. Perera), asanga@eng.pdn.ac.lk (D.A.A.C. Ratnaweera),
chamila.dasanayaka@uni.cumbria.ac.uk (C.H. Dasanayaka), chamil.abeykoon@manchester.ac.uk (C. Abeykoon).
diminishing non-renewable resources, legal requirements, high energy
costs, and consumer demand for environmentally friendly products, are
driving the modern process industries toward sustainable development
(Giret et al., 2015). The concepts of circular economy and cleaner
production have emerged as strategies that aim to achieve sustainable
development through energy conservation, emission reduction, and
improved production efficiency (Henao-Hernández et al., 2019; Hens
et al., 2018). These requirements have increased the importance of
the process monitoring aspect (and hence the demand for them as
well) in the process industries. In any industrial application, process
monitoring plays a crucial role in monitoring the process’s health to
ensure that the process functions within the desired limits (Abeykoon,
2018). This allows material wastage, environmental pollution, and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.105988
Received 17 June 2022; Received in revised form 24 January 2023; Accepted 9 February 2023
Available online 11 March 2023
0952-1976/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Y.S. Perera, D.A.A.C. Ratnaweera, C.H. Dasanayaka et al. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 121 (2023) 105988
energy consumption to be controlled while achieving a product with
the desired quality.
To enable process monitoring and control, the most common prac-
tice is to employ hardware sensors at desired locations of the process
(Kadlec et al., 2009). However, hardware sensors may not be suitable
for certain applications because of many factors including harsh/hostile
working environments which lead to frequent service requirements,
disturbances to the process flow and product quality, measurement
delays, access requirements, and high costs. This makes it difficult or
impossible to measure certain process variables directly using hard-
ware sensors. These ‘hard-to-measure’ process variables are mostly
related to product quality and due to the above-mentioned limitations,
they are normally determined by offline laboratory analyses (Warne
et al., 2004). Such offline measurements can introduce significant
measurement delays and discontinuity. Hence, it is impossible to carry
out real-time adjustments to maintain the product within the desired
quality constraints, and this may lead to increased material wastage,
excessive energy usage, environmental pollution, process degradation,
and so forth. To address these issues, some researchers have inves-
tigated the possibility of using mathematical models of processes to
estimate these ‘hard-to-measure’ q

===== 1-s2.0-S0952197623002555-main.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 56
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 122 (2023) 106071
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engappai
Survey paper
Classification Technique and its Combination with Clustering and
Association Rule Mining in Educational Data Mining — A survey
Sunita M. Dola,∗, Pradip M. Jawandhiyab
a Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Walchand Institute of Technology, Solapur 413006, Maharashtra, India
b Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pankaj Laddhad Institute of Technology and Management
Studies, Yelgaon, Buldhana 443002, Maharashtra, India
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Data mining
Educational data mining
Classification
Clustering
Association rule mining
A B S T R A C T
Educational data mining (EDM) is the application of data mining in the educational field. EDM is used
to classify, analyze, and predict the students’ academic performance, and students’ dropout rate, as well
as instructors’performance in order to improve teaching–learning process. This review article discusses the
detailed analysis of 142 research articles from publication year 2010-2020 downloaded from the research
databases such as IEEE, Springer, ACM, and Elsevier. Also this review article contains the current happenings
related to EDM in year 2021 and 2022. In this review article, the use of classification techniques and
classification techniques along with other data mining techniques such as clustering algorithm, association rule
algorithms, regression techniques and ensemble techniques in EDM are presented thoroughly. The comparative
study is considered for Classification Techniques; Classification and Clustering Technique; Classification ans
Association Rule Mining; Classification, Clustering and Association rule mining; Classification, Regression,
and Clustering; and Classification, and Ensemble. Analysis in terms of Yearwise Number of Research Articles
employing Classification Techniquein EDM; Classification with other Data Mining Technique used in EDM;
classifier as per Weka Tool; Classification Techniques; Clustering Techniques; Association Rule Techniques;
Selecting the best Classification Technique; Classification performance metric; software used in EDM; Sampling
Period; size of dataset; and data mining tools are illustrated.
From review of 142 research articles, it is noted that classification techniques are mostly used technique
for analyzing students’ performance in EDM. Also classification technique along with clustering techniques are
applied to predict the performance of students. It is found that Naïve Bays, Random Forest, Support vector
machine and J48 are mostly considered classification techniques while in classification along with clustering
techniques, K-means clustering algorithm is used with classification algorithms. The classification algorithms
such as Naïve Bays, Random Forest and Support Vector Machine are noted to be the best classification
algorithms after comparing various classification algorithms based on various performance parameters. Among
various performance parameters, the parameters accuracy, precision, recall, f-measures and k-fold value found
to be used by most of the research articles. Programming languages used to build the model in EDM for
analyzing the students’ dataset from educational setting, are Java, R and Python programming languages while
data mining tools considered to evaluate the performance of classification or clustering or association rule
algorithms are Weka, and RapidMiner. Classification algorithms under the classifiers as per Weka tool such as
Tree, Bays, Function and PMML classifier are applied in most of the research articles.
In addition to comparative analysis and analysis based on various factors, research gaps are also identified
and mentioned the same in this article. Future direction for researcher working in EDM related to building
the model on the dataset obtained from educational setting to predict students’ performance are discussed so
that work in EDM can be carried out to improve the teaching–learning process.
Abbreviations: EDM, Educational Data Mining; LMS, Learning Management System; MOOC, Massive Open Online Course; LDA, Linear Discriminant
Analysis; MLP, Multilayer Perceptron; ANN, Artificial Neural Network; SMO, Sequential minimal optimization; RBF, Radial Basis Function; KNN, K-Nearest
Neighbour; SVM, Support Vector Machine; TP, True Positive; TN, True Negative; FP, False Positive; FN, False Negative; RMSE, Root Mean Square Error; CART,
Classification And Regression Trees; ROC, Receiver Operating Characteristic; MAE, Mean Absolute Error; AUC, Area under the ROC Curve; CNN, Convolutional
Neural Network; DT, Decision Tree; VQNN, Vaguely Quantified Nearest Neighbour; GPRT, Gaussian Processes Random Tree; SVD, Singular Value Decomposition
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: sunita_aher@yahoo.com (S.M. Dol), pmjawandhiya@gmail.com (P.M. Jawandhiya).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106071
Received 4 April 2022; Received in revised form 28 September 2022; Accepted 26 February 2023
Available online 11 March 2023
0952-1976/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
S.M. Dol and P.M. Jawandhiya Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 122 (2023) 106071
1. Introduction
Educational data mining is nothing but collecting the data from edu-
cational setting, classifying this data as per requirement, and analyzing
data for predicting academic performance of students, identifying the
factors in early stages that leads to the students’ dropout, predicting
students’ performance in various programming courses, etc. An ed-
ucational system has huge amount of data which includes students’
academic record, students’ placement data, students’ performance in
programming languages, log data, instructors’ data, etc. This data is
from various resources such as online courses, Learning Management
System (LMS)/ Course Management System (CMS) such as MOODLE
(Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment) data, ed-
ucational software, etc. Data Mining techniques are applied on this
educational data to extract meaningful and useful pattern which can
further be considered to improve the teaching–learning process. Vari-
ous data mining techniques such as classification, clustering, regression,
neural network, genetic algorithms, association rule algorithms, etc. are
used to discover the knowledge from this educational dataset. In this
direction, various models have been proposed to analyze and predict
students’ performance in academic as well as in onlines learning. Such
six models are identified such as predicting the dropout rate, predict-
ing the students’ performance in online education/ courses, analyzing
students’ performance in programming courses, analyzing the Learning
Management System (LMS) data, predicting the students’ academic
performance and predicting the students’ placement
Fir

===== 1-s2.0-S2666920X2400016X-main.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Human-centred learning analytics and AI in education: A systematic literature review
AUTHOR_META: Riordan Alfredo
PAGES: 23
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 6 (2024) 100215
Available online 13 March 2024
2666-920X/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/).
Contentslistsavailableat ScienceDirect
Computers and Education: Artiﬁcial Intelligence
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-and-education-artiﬁcial-intelligence
Human-centred learning analytics and AI in education: A systematic 
literature review
RiordanAlfredo a,∗, VanessaEcheverria a,b, YueqiaoJin a, LixiangYan a, ZachariSwiecki a, 
DraganGaševi´ca, RobertoMartinez-Maldonado a
a Centre for Learning Analytics Monash (CoLAM), Monash University, Clayton, 3800, Victoria, Australia
b Escuela Superior Politécnica del Litoral, 30.5 Via Perimetral, Guayaquil, Ecuador
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Human-centered AI
Human-centered learning analytics
AI in education
Stakeholders involvement
Education technology
Ethical considerations
The rapid expansion of Learning Analytics (LA) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education (AIED) oﬀers new 
scalable, data-intensive systems but raises concerns about data privacy and agency. Excluding stakeholders—
like students and teachers—from  the design process can potentially lead to mistrust and inadequately aligned 
tools. Despite a shift towards human-centred design in recent LA and AIED research, there remain gaps in our 
understanding of the importance of human control, safety, reliability, and trustworthiness in the design and 
implementation of these systems. We conducted a systematic literature review to explore these concerns and 
gaps. We analysed 108 papers to provide insights about i) the current state of human-centred LA/AIED research; 
ii) the extent to which educational stakeholders have contributed to the design process of human-centred 
LA/AIED systems; iii) the current balance between human control and computer automation of such systems; 
and iv) the extent to which safety, reliability and trustworthiness have been considered in the literature. Results 
indicate some consideration of human control in LA/AIED system design, but limited end-user involvement 
in actual design. Based on these ﬁndings, we recommend: 1) carefully balancing stakeholders’ involvement in 
designing and deploying LA/AIED systems throughout all design phases 2) actively involving target end-users, 
especially students, to delineate the balance between human control and automation, and 3) exploring safety, 
reliability, and trustworthiness as principles in future human-centred LA/AIED systems.
1. Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) advancements are rapidly changing how 
we carry out our daily activities (Chakraborty et al., 2022). In educa-
tional contexts, AI and LA innovations are prompting a signiﬁcant trans-
formation by both enabling innovative teaching and learning strategies 
(Markauskaite et al., 2022) and, at the same time, challenging current 
assessment practices (Swiecki et al., 2022). Emerging Learning Analyt-
ics and AI in education (LA/AIED) systems oﬀer novel data-intensive 
solutions that promise to enable adaptive and personalised teaching 
and learning experiences at scale (Buckingham Shum & Luckin, 2019). 
For instance, various intelligent tutoring systems and LA solutions pro-
vide personalised learning support and automated feedback (e.g. Maier 
& Klotz, 2022, Cavalcanti et al., 2021). LA dashboards are providing 
educators with new means to track student progress and oﬀer tar-
geted support, potentially leading to improved student outcomes (e.g. 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address:riordan.alfredo@monash.edu(R.Alfredo).
Williamson & Kizilcec, 2022, Fernandez Nieto et al., 2022). LA/AIED 
systems, paired with novel interaction innovations, such as gamiﬁca-
tion and mixed reality (e.g. Carter & Egliston, 2023), are also enabling 
new pedagogical strategies that can potentially make learning more 
engaging and interactive for students. In sum, educational providers 
are increasingly adopting LA/AIED systems because data-intensive tech-
nologies hold the promise of making learning more accessible, scalable, 
eﬀective, and personalised for students (Macfadyen, 2022) by provid-
ing various forms of teacher-facing and student-facing user interfaces 
(Mavrikis & Cukurova, 2021, Buckingham Shum & Luckin, 2019).
Yet, the proliferation of LA/AIED systems raises key concerns about 
the privacy of students and security of educational data (Viberg et 
al., 2022), as well as the potential for algorithms to perpetuate bi-
ases and discrimination (Uttamchandani & Quick, 2022). The lack of 
involvement of students and teachers in the design and development of 
LA/AIED systems can potentially lead to a lack of understanding and 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100215
Received 20 December 2023; Received in revised form 2 March 2024; Accepted 7 March 2024
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 6 (2024) 100215
2
R.Alfredo,V.Echeverria,Y.Jinetal.
trust in the technology (Shibani et al., 2022, Dollinger et al., 2019, 
Sarmiento & Wise, 2022, Alzahrani et al., 2023). This lack of involve-
ment also raises questions about the accountability and transparency 
of AI in education (Tsai et al., 2020). Furthermore, increased student 
adoption of generative AI systems may recurrently challenge existing 
assessment practices and blur the lines of academic integrity (Moya et 
al., 2023). It is thus essential to address these concerns and incorporate 
the perspectives and authentic needs of students and teachers in design-
ing and implementing LA/AIED systems. This can potentially contribute 
to creating ethical, eﬀective, and inclusive ways to adopt LA/AIED sys-
tems (Williamson & Kizilcec, 2021, 2022).
In response to the above challenges, there has been a growing inter-
est in adopting human-centred design (HCD) approaches that prioritise 
human needs, values, and perspectives in the design and deployment of 
LA/AIED systems (Lang & Davis, 2023, Viberg et al., 2023, Luckin et al., 
2006, Buckingham Shum et al., 2019). Beyond education, there is also 
a growing interest in applying similar human-centred principles in the 
emerging discipline of Human-Centred AI (HCAI). An HCAI approach 
views AI as systems aimed at serving human interests rather than as 
a means of achieving technical goals or replacing humans (Shneider-
man, 2022, Usmani et al., 2023). Thus, the design of HCAI systems is to 
be guided by a set of ethical principles and design guidelines that em-
power end-users. The aim is to ensure that technologies providing high 
automation capabilities are created in ways that guarantee their trust-
worthiness, transparency, and beneﬁt to society (Usmani et al., 2023, 
Shneiderman, 2020a, Ozmen Garibay et al., 2023).
In recent years, the concept of HCAI has gained signiﬁcant attention 
in LA/AIED with a growing recognition of the importan

===== 10.1016_0377-0427(87)90125-7.pdf =====
TITLE_META: PII: 0377-0427(87)90125-7
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 13
Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 20 (1987) 53-65 
North-Holland 
53 
Silhouettes: a graphical aid 
to the interpretation and validation 
of cluster analysis 
Peter J. ROUSSEEUW 
University of Fribourg, ISES, CH-I 700 Fribourg Switzerland 
Received 13 June 1986 
Revised 27 November 1986 
Abstract: A new graphical display is proposed for partitioning techniques. Each cluster is represented by a so-called 
silhouette, which is based on the comparison of its tightness and separation. This silhouette shows which objects he 
well within their cluster, and which ones are merely somewhere in between clusters. The entire clustering is displayed 
by combining the silhouettes into a single plot, allowing an appreciation of the relative quality of the clusters and an 
overview of the data configuration. The average silhouette width provides an evaluation of clustering validity, and 
might be used to select an ‘appropriate’ number of clusters. 
Keywords: Graphical display, cluster analysis, clustering validity, classification. 
1. The need for graphical displays 
There are many algorithms for partitioning a set of objects into k clusters, such as the 
k-means method [6,9,13] and the k-median approach [20]. The result of such a partitioning 
technique is a list of clusters with their objects, which is not as visually appealing as the 
dendrograms of hierarchical methods. It is hoped that the graphical display introduced in 
Section 2 will contribute to the interpretation of cluster analysis results, as illustrated by the 
examples of Section 3. In Section 4, some other displays will be described. 
Suppose there are n objects to be clustered, which may be persons, flowers, cases, statistical 
variables, or whatever. Clustering algorithms mainly operate on two frequently used input data 
structures (see [18, Chapters 1 and 21). The first method is to represent the objects by means of a 
collection of measurements or attributes, such as height, weight, sex, color, and so on. In 
Tucker’s [19] terminology such an objects by attributes matrix is called two-mode, since the row 
and column entities are different. When the measurements are on an interval scale, one can 
compute the Euclidean distance d(i, j) between any objects i and j. 
This leads us to the second data structure, namely a collection of proximities which must be 
available for all pairs of objects. This corresponds to a one-mode matrix, since the row and 
column entities are the same set of objects. We shall consider two types of proximities: 
dissimilarities (which measure how far away two objects are from each other) and similarities 
0377-0427/87/$3.50 0 1987, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland) 
54 P.J. Rousseeuw / Graphical aid to cluster analysis 
Table 1 
Dissimilarities between twelve countries, obtained by averaging the result of a survey among political science students 
Country 
BRA 
CHI 
CUB 
EGY 
FRA 
IND 
ISR 
USA 
uss 
YUG 
ZAI 
Dissimilarities to other countries 
BEL BRA CHI CUB 
5.58 
7.00 6.50 
7.08 7.00 3.83 
4.83 5.08 8.17 5.83 
2.17 5.75 6.67 6.92 
6.42 5.00 5.58 6.00 
3.42 5.50 6.42 6.42 
2.50 4.92 6.25 7.33 
6.08 6.67 4.25 2.67 
5.25 6.83 4.50 3.75 
4.75 3.00 6.08 6.67 
EGY FRA IND ISR USA uss YUG 
4.92 
4.67 6.42 
5.00 3.92 6.17 
4.50 2.25 6.33 2.75 
6.00 6.17 6.17 6.92 6.17 
5.75 5.42 6.08 5.83 6.67 3.67 
5.00 5.58 4.83 6.17 5.67 6.50 6.92 
(which measure how much they resemble each other). In this paper we shall assume proximities 
on a ratio scale, such as the Euclidean distances mentioned. Also, most of the discussion will be 
concentrated on dissimilarities, but the formulas for similarities (with analogous interpretation) 
are also presented. 
Let us consider a real data set consisting of dissimilarities. A questionnaire was distributed in 
a political science class, asking the students to provide ratings of perceived positive dissimilarity 
between all distinct pairs of twelve countries on a scale from 1 to 9. This is a replication of a 
well-known experiment of Wish [23] with the students’ own country (Belgium) included. The 
countries were (in alphabetical order): Belgium (BEL), Brasil (BRA), mainland China (CHI), 
Cuba (CUB), Egypt (EGY), France (FRA), India (IND), Israel (ISR), United States (USA), 
USSR (USS), Yugoslavia (YUG), and Zaire (ZAI). It was imposed that the dissimilarities had to 
be symmetric, and the dissimilarity of a country to itself was not recorded. The final dissimilarity 
coefficients listed in Table 1 were obtained by taking the averages of the values given by the 
students. By construction, Table 1 is only a triangular half matrix. 
Still, Table 1 contains 66 numbers, making it hard to perceive the structure of the data by the 
naked eye. To obtain a better insight, one can partition the countries into k clusters. For 
instance, one can use the k-median method as described by Massart, Plastria and Kaufman [14], 
in which k representative objects are selected so as to minimize 
where d( i, m(i)) is the dissimilarity of object i to the nearest representative object, denoted by 
m(i)_ Like the k-means method, this algorithm tries to find roughly spherical clusters. This yields 
the following result for k = 2: 
and gives 
cluster 1: BEL, BRA, EGY, FRA, ISR, USA, ZAI 
cluster 2: CHI, CUB, IND, USS, YUG 
the following clustering for k = 3: 
cluster 1: BEL, EGY, FRA, ISR, USA 
cluster 2: BRA, IND, ZAI 
cluster 3: CHI, CUB, USS, YUG 

===== 10.1207_S15430421TIP4102_2.pdf =====
TITLE_META: ZimmermanPM
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 8
This article was downloaded by: [University of Oklahoma Libraries]
On: 07 September 2013, At: 16:44
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office:
Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Theory Into Practice
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription
information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/htip20
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner: An
Overview
Barry J. Zimmerman
Published online: 24 Jun 2010.
To cite this article: Barry J. Zimmerman (2002) Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner: An Overview, Theory Into
Practice, 41:2, 64-70, DOI: 10.1207/s15430421tip4102_2
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip4102_2
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”)
contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our
licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or
suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are
the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis.
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with
primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever
caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the
Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial
or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can
be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
64
THEORY  INTO PRACTICE  / Spring 2002
Becoming a Self-Regulated Learner
Barry J. Zimmerman is Distinguished Professor at the
Graduate School and University Center of the City
University of New York.
I
N AN ERA OF CONSTANT  DISTRACTIONS  in the form
     of portable phones, CD players, computers, and
televisions for even young children, it is hardly
surprising to discover that many students have not
learned to self-regulate their academic studying
very well. Consider the case of Tracy, a high school
student who is infatuated with MTV.
An important mid-term math exam is two
weeks away, and she has begun to study while
listening to popular music “to relax her.” Tracy
has not set any study goals for herself—instead
she simply tells herself to do as well as she can on
the test. She uses no specific learning strategies
for condensing and memorizing important material
and does not plan out her study time, so she ends up
cramming for a few hours before the test. She has
only vague self-evaluative standards and cannot gauge
her academic preparation accurately. Tracy attributes
her learning difficulties to an inherent lack of mathe-
matical ability and is very defensive about her poor
study methods. However, she does not ask for help
from others because she is afraid of “looking stu-
pid,” or seek out supplementary materials from the
library because she “already has too much to learn.”
She finds studying to be anxiety-provoking, has little
self-confidence in achieving success, and sees little
intrinsic value in acquiring mathematical skill.
Self-regulation researchers have sought to
understand students like Tracy and to provide help
in developing key processes that she lacks, such as
goal setting, time management, learning strategies,
self-evaluation, self-attributions, seeking help or
information, and important self-motivational beliefs,
such as self-efficacy and intrinsic task interest.
In recent years, there have been exciting dis-
coveries regarding the nature, origins, and devel-
opment of how students regulate their own learning
processes (Zimmerman & Schunk, 2001). Although
these studies have clearly revealed how self-regu-
latory processes lead to success in school, few
teachers currently prepare students to learn on their
own. In this article, I discuss students’ self-regula-
tion as a way to compensate for their individual
differences in learning, define the essential quali-
ties of academic self-regulation, describe the struc-
ture and function of self-regulatory processes, and,
finally, give an overview of methods for guiding
students to learn on their own.
Changing Conceptions of
Individual Differences
Since the beginning of public schooling in
the United States, educators have wrestled with
the presence of substantial differences in individu-
al students’ backgrounds and modes of learning.
Some students grasped important concepts easily
and seemed highly motivated to study, whereas
Barry J. Zimmerman
Becoming a Self-Regulated
Learner: An Overview
THEORY  INTO  PRACTICE , Volume 41, Number 2, Spring 2002
Copyright © 2002 College of Education, The Ohio State University
Theory Into Practice 2002.41:64-70.


===== 175_Analysis+of+Student+Performance+Applying+Data+Mining+Techniques+in+a+Virtual+Learning+Environment.pdf =====
TITLE_META: International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET) – eISSN: 1863-0383 – Vol  18 No  11 (2023)
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 21
Paper—Analysis of Student Performance Applying Data Mining Techniques in a Virtual Learning…
Analysis of Student Performance Applying Data Mining 
Techniques in a Virtual Learning Environment
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v18i11.37309
Leonardo Aguagallo1, Fausto Salazar-Fierro1,2, Janneth García-Santillán3,  
Miguel Posso-Yépez1, Pablo Landeta-López1, Iván García-Santillán1()
1Universidad Técnica del Norte, Ibarra, Ecuador
2Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Perú
3Unidad Educativa Juan Pablo II, Ibarra, Ecuador
idgarcia@utn.edu.ec
Abstract—Students’ academic performance is a key factor for educational 
institutions and society, which is an important indicator of the quality of the 
teaching-learning process and the appropriation of knowledge. Its analysis allows 
an understanding of the behavior of students and teachers, generating valuable 
knowledge for making timely academic decisions. In this study, the following 
phases were carried out: (i) identification of factors associated with the academic 
performance of engineering university students, (ii) early prediction of academic 
success (student performance), and (iii) identification of use patterns in a virtual 
learning environment (VLE). The Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) 
methodology was applied based on predictive and descriptive data mining tech -
niques, using academic and socioeconomic data and interactions (resources and 
activities) with the VLE. The tools and programming languages   used were Pen-
taho Data Integration for data integration and processing; Jupyter Notebook, 
Python, and Scikit-Learn for correlation analysis and prediction modeling; and R 
Studio for the clustering task. The results show that VLE resources such as files, 
links, and activities such as participation in forums are factors related to good 
academic performance. On the other hand, it was possible to make predictions 
of academic success (pass or fail) with an accuracy greater than 95% and to 
identify the main patterns of use of the VLE. The group with excellent academic 
performance (grades 9 to 10) is recognized for using file-type resources and high 
participation in class and forum activities.
Keywords—student performance, educational data mining, virtual learning 
environment, learning management systems, Knowledge Discovery in Data-
bases, machine learning in education, learning analytics
1 Introduction
1.1 Problem statement
The low academic performance of students is an indicator of the educational real -
ity of an educational institution [1], as well as a source of concern and interest for 
iJET ‒ Vol. 18, No. 11, 2023
175
Paper—Analysis of Student Performance Applying Data Mining Techniques in a Virtual Learning…
parents, institutions, and governments [2]. Educational institutions have made an effort 
to offer quality education to achieve good academic performance in their students [3], 
reflected in the acquisition of learning results. These and other factors have produced 
interest in studies on academic performance since they are an instrument for creat -
ing indicators that guide decision-making [4] in the teaching-learning process. Low 
student performance and desertion affect higher education and academic quality stan -
dards. This phenomenon significantly increases the waste of public resources assigned 
to education [5].
The way of learning and teaching has changed with the growing technological 
advance and the implementation of information and communication technologies (ICT) 
in education [6]. Educational institutions rely more and more on virtual learning envi -
ronments (VLE) [7], both in-person and online modality, especially in recent years 
(2020–2022) due to the Covid-19 pandemic. VLEs (such as Moodle, Google Class-
room, Chamilo, among others), also known as learning management systems (LMS), 
complement learning, interaction, and collaboration in the face-to-face classroom, 
managing student activities and resources. In addition, VLEs store interactions such 
as system access, delivery times, use of resources and activities, task delivery, etc. The 
interactions are a product of student behavior under an institutional framework [8] and 
generate a large amount of data to be analyzed to improve the learning and teaching 
process.
Currently, the benefits and disadvantages of virtual and face-to-face education mod-
els are well-known. Some pros of face-to-face learning are learning from other stu-
dents, real-time interaction, and improving social skills. Certain cons are no flexibility 
in place and time, use of traditional teaching, and dependent on the teacher. On the 
other hand, various pros of virtual learning are accessibility of time and place and 
cost affordability. Some cons are technology issues, a sense of isolation, and a long 
time in front of a screen [9]. There are several standards and best practices for virtual 
education [10], which consider, among others, the following topics: (a) Instructional 
design, indicating the learning objectives and appropriate online teaching methods; 
(b) Platforms and technologies, designed with accessibility and usability standards to 
facilitate interaction and communication between students and teachers; (c) Evaluation 
methods, adapted to the virtual format and that provide effective feedback to students; 
(d) Student support, including additional resources, tutorials, and advice on other ser -
vices available online; (e) Teacher training, for the management of virtual teaching that 
allows creating meaningful learning experiences in students.
In this context, Educational Data Mining (EDM) arises, which deals with discov -
ering knowledge from academic data sources [8]. The EDM comprises predictive and 
descriptive techniques used in data mining to understand and improve the use and 
exploitation of VLEs [11]. EDM has focused on the application of tasks of classifi-
cation, regression, grouping, association, visualization, modeling, and monitoring of 
learning activities [12]. Some research approaches are the prediction of student dropout 
[5][13], prediction of academic success (student performance) [14][15], identification 
of behavior patterns [15], and factors associated with academic performance [16], etc.
The objectives of this study applying EDM are the following: (i) the identification of 
factors associated with school performance; (ii) the creation of a model for predicting 
academic success (pass or not); and (iii) obtaining use patterns of VLE in engineering 
176
http://www.i-jet.org

===== 202606191707393680.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Comparative Performance of Machine Learning Models for Predicting At-Risk Students Using the OULAD Dataset
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 6
Comparative Performance of Machine Learning Models for
Predicting At-Risk Students Using the OULAD Dataset
Dongsheng Zhou∗
College of Management
Guangdong University of Science and
Technology
Dongguan, Guangdong, China
zhoudongsheng@gdust.edu.cn
Tian Jian
College of Management
Guangdong University of Science and
Technology
Dongguan, Guangdong, China
jiantian@gdust.edu.cn
Siqi Chen
College of Management
Guangdong University of Science and
Technology
Dongguan, Guangdong, China
chensiqi@gdust.edu.cn
Nanshun Jin
College of Management
Guangdong University of Science and
Technology
Dongguan, Guangdong, China
jinnanshun@gdust.edu.cn
Jinliang Wang
College of Management
Guangdong University of Science and
Technology
Dongguan, Guangdong, China
wangjinliang@gdust.edu.cn
Abstract
This study establishes a rigorous time-ordered machine learning
framework for early at-risk student prediction using the Open
University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD). Three ensem-
ble algorithms—Random Forest, XGBoost, and LightGBM—were
compared under strict temporal evaluation to prevent data leak-
age. LightGBM demonstrated the highest accuracy(0.8346) and
F1-score(0.8430), indicating superior balanced performance, while
all models achieved high precision (>0.89), ensuring reliable alerts.
The findings confirm gradient boosting, particularly LightGBM,
as an effective and practical tool for proactive student support in
higher education.
CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies; • Machine learning; • Machine
learning approaches;; • Modeling and simulation ; • Model
development and analysis;; • Applied computing; • Education;
• Computer-assisted instruction.;
Keywords
Early Prediction, At-Risk Students, Machine Learning, Higher Edu-
cation
ACM Reference Format:
Dongsheng Zhou, Tian Jian, Siqi Chen, Nanshun Jin, and Jinliang Wang.
2026. Comparative Performance of Machine Learning Models for Predicting
At-Risk Students Using the OULAD Dataset. In 2026 3rd International
Conference on Informatics Education and Computer Technology Applications
(IECA 2026), January 16–18, 2026, Shanghai, China. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3802133.3802174
∗Corresponding author
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
IECA 2026, Shanghai, China
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2156-4/2026/01
https://doi.org/10.1145/3802133.3802174
1 INTRODUCTION
Student retention and academic success remain persistent chal-
lenges in higher education institutions worldwide. Despite signifi-
cant investments in teaching resources and student support services,
rates of failure and withdrawal continue to impact institutional per-
formance and student outcomes. The ability to identify at-risk
students early in their academic journey is crucial for implement-
ing timely and targeted interventions that can alter educational
trajectories.
The emergence of learning analytics and educational data mining
has created unprecedented opportunities to address this challenge
through predictive modeling. By leveraging digital footprints left by
students in virtual learning environments (VLEs), researchers can
develop sophisticated algorithms to forecast academic performance.
However, many existing approaches treat student learning as a
static process, failing to capture the dynamic evolution of risk
factors over time. This limitation reduces both the accuracy and
practical utility of early warning systems.
This study addresses this gap by proposing a novel ensemble
learning framework that incorporates dynamic feature weighting
for early prediction of at-risk students. Using the comprehensive
Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD), which con-
tains detailed records of student demographics, academic history,
and VLE interactions, we investigate how the importance of differ-
ent predictive features changes throughout a course. Our methodol-
ogy compares three distinct approaches—Random Forest, XGBoost,
and LightGBM—to determine the most effective strategy for identi-
fying students requiring intervention.
The contribution of this work is twofold: methodologically, we
introduce a temporal dimension to feature importance in predictive
modeling; practically, we provide educators with actionable insights
that reflect the evolving nature of student engagement and risk. By
validating our approach on a large-scale, real-world dataset, we
aim to advance both the theory and practice of learning analytics,
ultimately supporting more effective student success initiatives in
higher education.
247
IECA 2026, January 16–18, 2026, Shanghai, China Dongsheng Zhou et al.
2 RELATED WORK
The prediction of student academic performance using machine
learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) has been a rapidly
evolving field. This section reviews recent key studies (primarily
from the last five years) that benchmark various ML algorithms and
explore the integration of explainable AI (XAI) for this purpose.
Early foundational work established the viability of ML for per-
formance prediction. [ 1] utilized deep learning models on virtual
learning environment data, finding their Deep Neural Network
outperformed Logistic Regression and SVM. [ 2] conducted a com-
parative study using k-NN, Decision Tree, Neural Networks, and
Naïve Bayes on a dataset of 151 instances. Their Decision Tree
model outperformed others and was crucially translated into inter-
pretable rules to generate specific preventive measures, marking
an early shift towards actionable insights.
Research focus shifted towards ensemble methods and more
sophisticated frameworks. [ 3] compared Neural Networks, Naïve
Bayes, and Bayesian Networks, with Artificial Neural Networks
achieving the highest accuracy. [ 4] developed a novel Genetic Pro-
gramming (GP)-based AI model for online engineering education,
which could generate highly non-linear prediction functions with-
out predefined variable relationships. [ 5] proposed an innovative
ML model for forecasting undergraduate final exam scores based
on midterm results.
A significant trend emerged towards making model predictions
interpretable for educators. [ 6] combined Random Forest (RF),
ANN, and SVM with LIME and SHAP for early at-risk student
identification, with RF achieving exceptional accuracy (99.662%).
[7] proposed an advanced, explainable ML framework integrating
LightGBM, RF, XGBoost, and NGBoost, using LIME and SHAP
for explanations, with NGBoost achieving 90% accuracy. [ 8] em-
ployed an ensemble learning approach to predict university student
attrition rates.
Recent studies continue to refine model accuracy and trans-
parency. [ 9] provided a systematic overview and comparison of
supervised data mining techniques for student exam performance
prediction. [ 10] focused on validating the accuracy of a convolu-
tional neural network-based deep learning algorithm for predicting
student grades. A pivotal study by [ 11] provided a comprehensive
benchm

===== 202607261103440299.pdf =====
TITLE_META: An Attentive Deep Learning Framework for the Prediction of Academic Performance of Students in Virtual Learning Environments
AUTHOR_META: A. Mohanarathinam (1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Coimbatore 641021, Tamil Nadu, India), M. Arunkumar (1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Coimbatore 641021, Tamil Nadu, India), and Kamalraj Subramaniam (1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Coimbatore 641021, Tamil Nadu, India)
PAGES: 24
An Attentive Deep Learning Framework for the Prediction
of Academic Performance of Students in Virtual Learning
Environments
A. Mohanarathinam
 *, M. Arunkumar
 and Kamalraj Subramaniam
Department of Biomedical Engineering
Karpagam Academy of Higher Education
Coimbatore 641021, Tamil Nadu, India
*mohanarathinam@gmail.com
Received 18 July 2025
Revised 31 December 2025
Accepted 2 January 2026
Published 14 May 2026
Virtual learning environments (VLEs) and Massive open online courses (MOOCs) are two
trends that have emerged due to the usage of new technology in education. However, without
adequate monitoring, the students will su®er from online education's inability to assess
students' achievement. In this research, the Attentive Pelican Optimized Dense Gated Recurrent
Unit (APDGRU) network is introduced. In order to eliminate the information that is required for
prediction, one-hot encoding (OHE) is used. Dense Connectivity Network (DenseNet) and Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) are two deep learning models included in the proposed network design,
along with another method for carefully evaluating the relative contributions of di®erent
elements. The dataset parameters, which mostly consist of categorical data like the student's
personal information, are fed into the suggested model. The primary variables in the dataset that
have the largest impacts on student performance are found using the DenseNet model. The
proposed model's GRU unit deals with temporal data, such as how long students engage in
VLE-based learning and interaction. The attention mechanism is crucial for helping the model
recognize the best traits, which it learns throughout training. The attention mechanism's inte-
gration enhances the model's interpretability and accuracy by concentrating on the most perti-
nent characteristics a®ecting academic success. The proposed model parameters enable the
creation of the best predictions considering formal metric maximization and interpretability. By
minimizing the logarithmic loss function, the model's internal parameters are familiar with the
Pelican Optimization Algorithm (POA). POA modi¯es model weights to ensure the suggested
model performs at its best by reducing errors, accelerating the convergence and avoiding over-
¯tting. Furthermore, POA aids in the selection of pertinent characteristics and the avoidance of
unnecessary data, resulting in a more robust and generalized model. The implementations are
carried out in the Python platform, and the evaluations are done using the Open University
Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD). The overall accuracy of 97.18% proves the model's bene¯t
over other existing models.
* Corresponding author.
International Journal of Software Engineering
and Knowledge Engineering
Vol. 36, No. 13 (2026) 1821 –1844
#.c World Scienti¯c Publishing Company
DOI: 10.1142/S0218194026500026
1821
Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2026.36:1821-1844. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by ZHEJIANG UNIVERSITY on 07/25/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
Keywords: Binary vector; attention mechanism; gradient vanishing; long-term dependence
features; activation function; social dynamics and foraging strategies; Exploration and exploi-
tation.
1. Introduction
The 2020 COVID-19 pandemic changed everything. K-12 and higher education have
abandoned traditional classroom instruction [ 1–3]. The Internet provides lessons
reading and homework information. Mining, analytics and predictive measures are
available with educational database systems' continually rising data. Faculty and
students can communicate, present and exchange resources on a virtual learning
environment (VLE) to ¯nish an online course or supplement classroom training [ 4, 5].
Lack of student –teacher connection hinders educational change [ 6]. The quick
switch to online classes during a pandemic decreased interest /C0 /C0 /C0 another issue [ 7–9].
Machine learning class imbalance is di±cult to solve. Machine learning cannot tackle
this problem [ 10]. Educational data show that successful students outnumber failing
students by a large ratio [ 11]. Most classi¯ers are designed to learn from balanced
datasets so this class imbalance causes many issues [ 12, 13]. The proposed approach
avoids class imbalance by using the publicly accessible OULAD dataset, which
performs well in all scenarios [ 14, 15]. This study uses a neural network to help
students and prevent di±culties in a safe online learning environment. The Pelican
Optimization Algorithm (POA), Dense Connectivity Network (DenseNet), GRU
and attention mechanisms are well-established in the recommended architecture, but
their task-driven integration is novel. GRU tracks temporal engagement patterns,
DenseNet extracts reusable structural properties from student/course data, and
attention identi¯es interpretability moments. Gradient-free hyperparameter tuning
boosts POA robustness. This approach increases predictive accuracy, shows feature
interdependencies, important weeks of student engagement and other innovative
educational insights. The results show that metaheuristic optimization can support
hybrid spatiotemporal models in deep learning, enabling more resilient and under-
standable architectures in relevant applications.
1.1. Problem statement and motivation
Schools, institutions and organizations have halted in-person instruction during the
outbreak. In these harsh times, teachers are attempting new teaching and learning
methods to better serve their institutions and students. Teachers study online
learning methods and receive training from top universities to digitize education.
The sudden switch to online schooling during the pandemic impeded participation.
Academics have developed deep learning and machine learning models to address
online learning platform issues. These models are ine®ective and misclassify, serious
di±culties. This paper presents a model that solves model problems and outputs
pass, fail and average. Massive Open Online Course (MOOCs) and VLs are employed
1822 A. Mohanarathinam, M. Arunkumar & K. Subramaniam
Int. J. Soft. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 2026.36:1821-1844. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by ZHEJIANG UNIVERSITY on 07/25/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

===== 202607261417519843.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Early Prediction of Online Learning Completion Based on Temporal-Activity Hierarchical Attention Mechanism
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 5
Early Prediction of Online Learning Completion Based on
Temporal-Activity Hierarchical Attention Mechanism
Yuqi Yang∗
SHAANXI UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
jhpjh50947489@qq.com
Abstract
Affected by the pandemic, online learning platforms have devel-
oped rapidly, but the student failure rate and dropout rate have
increased significantly. The main reason is that teachers struggle to
identify student problems in a timely manner and adjust teaching
plans. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a Hierarchical
Temporal-Activity Attention Network (HTA-Net) that only uses stu-
dents’ learning data from the first four weeks. The model captures
dynamic behavioral characteristics through a two-layer structure
of activity type attention mechanism and temporal attention mech-
anism, and integrates static student information to achieve early
prediction of course completion at the end of the semester. Ex-
periments on the OULAD dataset verify the effectiveness of the
model, with an accuracy of 83.9% and an F1-score of 83.9%, which
is significantly superior to baseline models. This method improves
the timeliness and practicality of prediction and provides teachers
with personalized intervention support.
CCS Concepts
• Social and professional topics → Professional topics; Comput-
ing education.
Keywords
Online Learning, Early Prediction, Attention Mechanism, Course
Completion
ACM Reference Format:
Yuqi Yang. 2026. Early Prediction of Online Learning Completion Based
on Temporal-Activity Hierarchical Attention Mechanism. In 2026 2nd Inter-
national Conference on Digital Education and Information Technology (DEIT
2026), January 23–25, 2026, Changsha, China. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3802607.3802658
1 Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the development of online
courses, with students increasingly relying on platforms such as
MOOCs. However, the core problem exposed by online learning
is the substantial increase in student failure and dropout rates,
mainly because teachers cannot monitor student problems in real
time and formulate targeted teaching plans as they do in offline
∗Corresponding author
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
DEIT 2026, Changsha, China
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2170-0/2026/01
https://doi.org/10.1145/3802607.3802658
teaching. Therefore, early prediction of students’ course completion
helps teachers optimize teaching strategies in a timely manner,
thereby improving the final completion rate. Existing academic
performance prediction studies mostly rely on a large amount of
historical data from individual students (such as learning records
of more than ten weeks). Although they have high accuracy, they
lack practicality because these models need to wait for a long time
to output prediction results.
This paper proposes a two-layer attention model that only uses
students’ learning data from the first four weeks. It captures dy-
namic behavioral patterns through temporal attention mechanism
and activity type attention mechanism, and integrates static fea-
tures for prediction. While maintaining high accuracy, the model
significantly reduces the amount of dynamic data and improves
timeliness and practical application value.
2 Related Work
To improve online learning effectiveness, early researchers mainly
focused on teaching models and curriculum organization forms, es-
pecially the teaching potential and implementation paths of blended
learning in higher education. Relevant studies have shown that the
reasonable integration of online and offline elements is expected
to enhance learning experience and academic outcomes [1]. With
the large-scale accumulation of data from Learning Management
Systems (LMS) and Virtual Learning Environments (VLE), Learning
Analytics (LA) and Educational Data Mining (EDM) have gradually
become important research paradigms. Prediction tasks such as aca-
demic performance, course passing status, and dropout are among
the most common and practical directions in LA/EDM, which can
provide operable decision support for teaching interventions [2, 3].
In terms of learning outcome prediction, traditional machine
learning methods have long dominated. A common approach is
to construct features from demographic information, tests/assign-
ments, and statistical characteristics of learning behaviors, and then
use classification models to output labels such as “completed/not
completed” or “passed/not passed”. Classic decision tree methods
are often used as baselines or feature analysis tools due to their
strong interpretability; gradient boosting tree models have also
become commonly used strong baselines in educational prediction
tasks due to their ability to characterize nonlinearity and feature
interactions [4, 5]. Furthermore, to meet the teaching demand of
“the earlier the warning, the better”, some studies train or evalu-
ate models at different stages of the course progress (such as 20%,
40%, etc.) to compare the predictability and intervenability un-
der different observation windows [6]. In the direction of deep
learning, sequence models (especially LSTM) are widely used in
323
DEIT 2026, January 23–25, 2026, Changsha, China Yuqi Yang
Table 1: Statistical Summary of the OULAD Dataset
Students Courses Ave_clicks Complete Incomplete
6519 22 3.72 3687 2832
learning process modeling because they can capture temporal de-
pendencies [7]. Liu et al. [8] aggregated click behaviors by week
on the OULAD dataset, compared the effects of methods such as
LSTM and 1D-CNN with traditional methods, and analyzed the
website/activity types that are more critical to learning outcomes.
On the other hand, as a public dataset containing demographic
and VLE interaction summaries, OULAD provides an important
foundation for cross-study comparison and reproducible evalua-
tion, thus becoming one of the commonly used benchmarks for
online learning outcome prediction [9]. However, pure sequence
models often lack explicit characterization of the contribution of
“key weeks/key activities”, resulting in models that are effective but
have high interpretation costs, and are not conducive to directly
converting prediction results into executable teaching intervention
clues.
This paper innovatively introduces a temporal-activity hierar-
chical attention network. Using only data from the first four weeks,
it takes a two-dimensional tensor of “week × activity type” as input
and applies attention at the activity type level and temporal level.
This design is more in line with the characteristics of VLE.
3 Methodology
3.1 Dataset Description
This study adopts the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset
(OULAD) [6], which includes seven CSV files: courses.csv (course
information), assessments.csv and studentAssessment.csv (assign-
ment and exam information), studentInfo.csv (student information),
studentRegistration.cs

===== 202607261424006476.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: IJAIML
PAGES: 11
www.svedbergopen.com                      International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
Vol.6, No.1s, 2026                                                                                                                                                                          265 
 
 
DISSEMINA TION OF KNOWLEDGE   
 
Predicting Student Motivation and Engagement Using a 
Hybrid of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNS) and 
Reinforcement Learning 
Dr. Gopinath R1*, Rajashri CK2, Munira Baymatova3, Jeyanthi P4, Mamataliev Marufjon Mamatjonovich5,  
Ismat Saparov6 
 
1*Associate Professor, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, K.S.Rangasamy College of Technology, Tiruchengode, 
India. E-mail: gopinath@ksrct.ac.in, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7287-2516 
2Assistant Professor, Computer Science, Meenakshi College of Arts and Science, Meenakshi Academy of Higher Education and 
Research, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail:  rajashrick@maher.ac.in 
3Lecturer, Department of Translation and Interpreting Studies Silk Road International University of Tourism and Cultural Heritage, 
Samarkand, Uzbekistan. E-mail: munira.baymatova@univ-silkroad.uz, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5269-7258  
4Assistant Professor, Department of Commerce, Meenakshi College of Arts and Science, Meenakshi Academy of Higher Education 
and Research, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.  E-mail: jeyanthicom@maher.ac.in 
5Turan International University, Namangan, Uzbekistan. E-mail: marufjon7555@gmail.com, https://orcid.org/0009-0000-7995-
738X 
6Department of Economics, Termez University of Economics and Service, Termez, Uzbekistan. E-mail:  ismat_saparov@tues.uz, 
https://orcid.org/0009-0006-5194-023X 
*Corresponding author: Email: gopinath@ksrct.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
The advent of such large digital learning environments has resulted in the creation of large amounts of data 
regarding interactions between learners. Learner motivation and engagement are known to be crucial factors 
that play key roles in determining learn ing success, course completions, and overall academic persistence [1]. 
 
 
Svedberg Open 
International Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence and Machine Learning 
Publisher's Home Page: https://www.svedbergopen.com/ 
Research Paper    Open Access 
Abstract 
This is an open access article under CC BY 4.0, allowing unrestricted use with proper attribution, a license link, and indication of any changes made.  
www.svedbergopen.com                      International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
Vol.6, No.1s, 2026                                                                                                                                                                          266 
 
Recent studies on AI -driven recommendation and behavioral analytics further emphasize the importance of 
adaptive and context-aware learning systems for enhancing learner participation and personalized educational 
support [2] [6] [8]. Although learner motivation and engagement are highly significant in this respect, current 
predictive models tend to use only static or point -in-time learner characteristics, without taking into 
consideration the inherently temporal nature of the phenomena  at hand [ 19]. This dr awback is especially 
noticeable in MOOCs and blended learning environments, where dropout rates often go well above 80%, and 
learners tend to become progressively unengaged over several learning sessions [3].  
The inclusion of RNNs, especially LSTMs, facilitates a systematic approach to capturing the behavioral pattern of 
learners from time series [ 20]. Recent advances in hybrid temporal architectures, such as TCN -LSTM and 
multimodal GRU -based attention models, have demonstrated superior performance in sequential knowledge 
tracing and behavioral pattern recognition tasks [13] [28]. At the same time, RL can be used as an adaptive 
intervention strategy that allows the system to learn the right response strategies ba sed on environmental 
rewards [5]. Hybrid recommendation and collaborative filtering mechanisms have also demonstrated strong 
capabilities in dynamically adapting content delivery based on user interaction histories and contextual patterns 
[4]. Despite both approaches being used separately, a combined use of them for prediction and adaptive 
interventions in the context of learner behavior has received little attention so far in the educational data mining 
domain. 
The objective of this paper is to address this gap by proposing RRHEP , an integrated framework that uses LSTM-
based temporal encoders to learn features from sequence data and a Deep Q -Network (DQN) agent to provide 
recommendations for learning activities based on contextual conditions. The proposed model is evaluated using 
the widely used OULAD dataset.  
1.1.  Significance of the Problem 
Academic disengagement has physical impacts, as for every 1% increase in early disengagement indicators, there 
is a corresponding 3.2% increase in the probability of withdrawing during the academic semester [ 21]. 
Traditional EWS utilizes cut-off values based either on grades or attendance, and is reactive instead of proactive. 
There is a dire need for the development of real -time and personalized EWS, which will simulate the behavior of 
engaged students.  Advances in deep contextual representation learning, multimodal sequential learning, and 
generative AI -based personalization strategies further reinforce the need for intelligent educational systems 
capable of adaptive intervention and engagement optimization [14] [15].  
1.2.  Unique Contributions 
The key contributions of this work are as follows:  
1. A novel hybrid LSTM -DQN architecture (RRHEP) specifically designed for student motivation and 
engagement prediction in educational environments.  
2. An adaptive reward -shaping mechanism that aligns reinforcement learning feedback with pedagogical 
engagement indicators. 
3. Comprehensive empirical evaluation on OULAD with five comparative baselines and an ablation study 
confirming modular contributions. 
4. Quantitative evidence of a 42% reduction in intervention response latency relative to static feedback 
systems. 
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a detailed, systematic literature review of existing 
work. Section 3 introduces the RRHEP method, which includes the system architecture, algorithms, and 
mathematical models of the problem. Section 4 describes the results of experiments and analysis of performance 
and ablation studies. Section 5 concludes the paper . 
2. Literature Survey 
In this section, there is a review of the literature in three areas that are related to each other: (i) use of machine 
learning approaches to predict the engagement of learners, (ii) sequence/time -series modeling in educational 
data mining, and (iii) reinforcement learning for adaptive learning systems. 

===== 202607261435563957.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Leveraging machine learning and clickstream data to improve student performance prediction in virtual learning environments 
AUTHOR_META: Zakaria Khoudi, Nasreddine Hafidi and Mourad Nachaoui, Soufiane Lyaqini
PAGES: 21
Leveraging machine learning and clickstream 
data to improve student performance 
prediction in virtual learning environments 
Zakaria Khoudi, Nasreddine Hafidi and Mourad Nachaoui 
Equipe Math ematiques et Interactions, Faculty of Science and Technology, Sultan Moulay Slimane University, 
Beni Mellal, Morocco, and 
Soufiane Lyaqini 
LIPIM Laboratory, USMS ENSA Khouribga, Khouribga, Morocco  
Abstract 
Purpose – The purpose of this research is to evaluate the utility of clickstream data and machine learning algorithms in predicting student performance 
and enhancing online learning experiences. By leveraging clickstream data and machine learning algorithms, the study aims to predict student performance 
accurately, enabling timely and personalized interventions. This approach seeks to reduce high failure and dropout rates in online courses, ultimately 
enhancing educational outcomes and preserving the reputation of educational institutions. 
Design/methodology/approach – This study utilizes clickstream data from the Open University Learning Analytics Data set (OULAD) to predict 
student performance in virtual learning environments. The approach involves extracting and organizing data into weekly and monthly interactions. 
Various machine learning models, including traditional methods (Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbors, Random Forest, XGBoost) 
and advanced time-series models (LSTM-XGBoost, GRU), are employed to analyze the data. The GRU model demonstrated the highest accuracy, 
offering insights into student engagement and learning patterns. 
Findings – The study reveals that integrating clickstream data with machine learning models provides a robust framework for predicting student 
performance in virtual learning environments. Among the methods tested, the GRU algorithm outperformed six baseline models, achieving an 
accuracy of 90.13%. These findings underscore the effectiveness of using advanced time-series models to monitor and improve student engagement 
and success rates in online education. 
Originality/value – This research introduces a novel approach to student performance prediction by combining traditional and advanced time- 
series machine learning models with clickstream data. The study’s originality lies in its comprehensive analysis of both weekly and monthly student 
interactions, providing educators with a powerful tool for early intervention. The findings contribute to the growing body of literature on learning 
analytics, offering practical solutions to enhance online education’s effectiveness and reduce dropout rates.  
Keywords Clickstream data, Students at risk, VIF, Student performance prediction, Machine learning, Virtual learning environment, GRU algorithm 
Paper type  Research paper 
1. Introduction 
Online learning has emerged as a transformative mode of 
instruction in higher education, driven by advancements in 
computer and network technologies. The COVID-19 pandemic 
further accelerated its adoption, particularly in 2020, as most 
teaching and learning activities shifted online. In developing 
regions, online learning offers significant advantages, such as 
overcoming time and location barriers, reducing educational costs 
and expanding access for individuals unable to attend traditional 
in-person classes (
Ouyang et al., 2022; Rizvi et al., 2019). 
However, despite its potential, online learning faces significant 
challenges, including high failure and dropout rates. Studies 
indicate alarmingly low completion rates for online courses, with 
some reporting rates below 15%, and in extreme cases, as low as 
5% (
Hlosta et al., 2017). For instance, research by He et al. 
(2015) revealed that only 795 out of 51,306 students enrolled in 
online courses successfully completed their programs, resulting in 
a completion rate of just 1.5%. These high failure and dropout 
rates not only undermine the effectiveness of online learning but 
also tarnish the reputation of educational institutions. To address 
these challenges, early identification of at-risk students through 
accurate performance prediction is critical. By leveraging 
predictive techniques, institutions can allocate resources more 
effectively, providing timely interventions and support to reduce 
the likelihood of failure (
Huang et al., 2020). Unlike traditional 
classroom settings, online learning lacks direct interaction 
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald 
Insight at: https://www.emerald.com/insight/2398-6247.htm 
Information Discovery and Delivery 
54/2 (2026) 197–217 
© Emerald Publishing Limited [ISSN 2398-6247] 
[DOI 10.1108/IDD-08-2024-0120] 
Conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have no confict of interest. 
Availability of data and materials: The data used this study are available 
from https://analyse.kmi.open.ac.uk/open-dataset 
Received 17 August 2024 
Revised 17 November 2024 
28 January 2025 
Accepted 30 January 2025 
197 
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/idd/article-pdf/54/2/197/11415728/idd-08-2024-0120en.pdf by Zhejiang University user on 26 July 2026
between instructors and students, making it difficult to monitor 
progress. However, technological advancements have mitigated 
this limitation by enabling the collection and storage of vast 
amounts of data on student activities within digital platforms 
(
Kuzilek et al., 2017). Clickstream data, which captures users’ 
sequential interactions and navigation behaviors, offers a rich 
resource for analyzing learner engagement. This data-driven 
approach allows researchers to identify the underlying causes of 
student failure, enabling early interventions and enhancing the 
overall learning experience (
Baig et al., 2023). Predictive analytics 
not only helps identify areas of weakness but also supports the 
development of personalized learning plans tailored to improve 
academic performance ( Batool et al., 2023). By adopting 
advanced predictive analytics techniques, educational institutions 
can achieve significant improvements in student outcomes and 
the overall quality of instruction (
Pallathadka et al., 2023). In 
summary, while online learning presents unique challenges, the 
integration of data-driven strategies holds promise for addressing 
these issues and fostering a more effective and inclusive 
educational environment. 
Numerous outcomes are predicted using a range of data 
analytics and machine learning approaches, with deep artificial 
neural networks (ANN) being particularly notable for their 
sophisticated learning capabilities (Coelho and Silveira, 2017). 
Traditional feature engineering techniques are revolutionized by 
deep learning, distinguished by its hierarchical learning approach 
comprising numerous computing layers and the ability for systems 
to learn from previous examples (Sarwat et al., 2022). Nevertheless, 
there still needs to be more research in academic publications about 
the effectiveness of dee

===== 202607261521311669.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Contextualizing the research problem: improving cluster analysis insights into student learning
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 24
International Journal of Research & Method in Education
ISSN: 1743-727X (Print) 1743-7288 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cwse20
Contextualizing the research problem: improving
cluster analysis insights into student learning
Emma Howard, Arthur White & Jason Wyse
To cite this article: Emma Howard, Arthur White & Jason Wyse (2026) Contextualizing
the research problem: improving cluster analysis insights into student learning,
International Journal of Research & Method in Education, 49:2, 184-206, DOI:
10.1080/1743727X.2026.2617530
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1743727X.2026.2617530
View supplementary material 
Published online: 26 Jan 2026.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 206
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cwse20
Contextualizing the research problem: improving cluster 
analysis insights into student learning
Emma Howard 
 , Arthur White 
 and Jason Wyse 
School of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
ABSTRACT  
Cluster analysis is widely used in educational settings to gain 
insights into student learning. To justify their choice of clustering 
approach, authors often draw on methods used in earlier studies 
that they perceive to be similar. This can sometimes come at the 
expense of selecting a clustering method better suited to 
addressing their own study’s goals. We argue that the selection 
of an appropriate clustering method should be closely connected 
to the context of the study. We demonstrate our argument 
through the use of the Open University Learning Analytics 
Dataset (OULAD), a well-established open access educational data 
set. Through a review of studies citing the OULAD, we identify 
five possible motivations for clustering educational data and then 
focus on two of these: early identification of at-risk students and 
identification of similar groups of learners. We discuss the 
educational context behind the two motivations selected, 
describe which variable subsets from the OULAD might best align 
with the specific research questions that they motivate, and 
illustrate how a preferred clustering method may be highly 
influenced and driven by specifics of the research question. For 
example, the desire for an expression of uncertainty in cluster 
membership allocation. Fully reproducible R code is provided.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 16 April 2025 
Accepted 10 December 2025  
KEYWORDS  
Cluster analysis; educational 
data mining; learning 
analytics; student profiles; 
online learning
1. Introduction
Cluster analysis is an unsupervised learning technique used to partition a set of data points or 
observations into homogeneous clusters or groups. Observations in the same cluster are 
more similar to each other than to observations in other clusters (James et al. 2021 , Everitt 
et al. 2011 ). Variations of this definition include where observations may belong to multiple 
clusters, having competing degrees of membership to each. Traditionally, in educational 
research, cluster analysis has been deployed to group students with similar characteristics 
together, and these groups are often then related to academic achievement. For example, 
one debate in education focuses on whether students benefit equally from watching 
videos or attending lectures. Inglis et al. ( 2011 ) clustered students according to their use of 
module
1
resources (Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), lecture attendance and mathematics 
support centre usage) and found that the cluster with high lecture attendance achieved the 
© 2026 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 
CONTACT  Emma Howard 
 emhoward@tcd.ie
 School of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Dublin, Ireland
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/1743727X.2026.2617530 .
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH & METHOD IN EDUCATION 
2026, VOL. 49, NO. 2, 184–206 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1743727X.2026.2617530


===== 202607261522085114.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Pedagogically‐Informed Behavioural Learning Analytics: An Expert Approach to Predicting at‐Risk Students
AUTHOR_META: Saleh Alhazbi
PAGES: 16
1 of 16Expert Systems, 2026; 43:e70210
https://doi.org/10.1111/exsy.70210
Expert Systems
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Pedagogically- Informed Behavioural Learning Analytics: 
An Expert Approach to Predicting at- Risk Students
Saleh Alhazbi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar
Correspondence:  Saleh Alhazbi (salhazbi@qu.edu.qa )
Received:  18 November 2025 | Revised:  1 January 2026 | Accepted:  12 January 2026
Keywords: at- risk students | behavioural indicators | early-  warning systems | learning analytics | pedagogically informed features
ABSTRACT
This study proposes a theory- informed learning analytics approach for predicting at-  risk students using large- scale behavioural, 
demographic and academic data. Building on engagement theory and self- regulated learning, we engineer pedagogically grounded 
behavioural indicators that move beyond raw click counts. These indicators include multidimensional engagement measures, 
temporal regularity and an antiprocrastination score derived from assessment submission patterns. Using the Open University 
Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD), comprising 32,593 students across 22 courses, we reformulate the prediction task as a bi -
nary classification problem (Pass vs. At-  Risk) and compare three machine learning algorithms: Support Vector Machine (SVM), 
Random Forest (RF) and Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost). Models are evaluated at four quarter-  based checkpoints over 
the semester to investigate temporal dynamics and opportunities for timely intervention. Results show that XGBoost consistently 
outperforms RF and SVM in accuracy, recall, precision and ROC AUC, while behavioural features overwhelmingly dominate 
demographic and academic variables in predictive importance. Temporal analysis reveals that model performance improves 
substantially from the first to the third quarter, with mid-  semester predictions offering the best trade-  off between accuracy and 
time remaining for effective support. The findings demonstrate the value of theory-  driven feature engineering and temporally 
sensitive evaluation in designing early-  warning systems that are both accurate and pedagogically actionable.
1   |   Introduction
Due to the rapid digital transformation in education, a large 
amount of data is now being collected about students. Analysing 
this passively collected data offers deep insights into students' 
learning patterns. These insights represent a valuable source of 
information for learners, instructors and administrators in order 
to enhance the quality of teaching and learning. Over the last 
decade, the interest in learning analytics (LA) has evolved sig -
nificantly among institutions to harness the potential of learn -
ers' data to address different challenges including personalising 
learning resources, reducing student dropout rates and provid -
ing students with timely proactive support (Tsai et  al.  2020). 
One of the most important issues in LA is predicting students' 
performance, which can be utilised to identify students at risk 
of academic failure as early as possible (Conijn et al.  2017; Jang 
et al.  2022; Waheed et al.  2023).
Typically, LA predictive models are based on machine learning 
approaches that analyse student-  related data to capture hidden 
patterns, trends and correlations in order to forecast students' 
performance. Students' data generally include demographic in -
formation, academic data and indicators of online learning be -
haviour. These diverse data types provide a comprehensive view 
of learners' progress and engagement, forming the foundation 
for predictive modelling and early identification of at-  risk stu -
dents (Umer et  al.  2021). Incorporating these diverse types of 
data into predictive models provides rich insights into various 
aspects of students' academic experience, which improve mod -
els' accuracy.
© 2026 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

2 of 16 Expert Systems, 2026
By tracking students' online learning behaviours, such as fre -
quency of logins, amount and type of engagements with course 
materials, patterns in students' learning processes can be cap -
tured and used to forecast students' performance. Many stud -
ies (Conijn et al.  2017; Riestra-  González et al.  2021; Tamada 
et al.  2022 ; Sghir et al.  2023) have leveraged behavioural data 
for predicting students' performance, aiming to identify those 
who are at risk of failing the course. Unlike demographic data, 
which provide static insights into students' backgrounds, or 
even performance data, which offers a retrospective view of 
student achievement, behavioural data captures the dynamic, 
real- time interactions of students with their coursework. It 
reflects the depth of engagement with learning materials, 
like total interaction with the course resources, submissions 
of assignments and other behaviours indicative of a student's 
approach to learning. Therefore, behavioural data offers a 
unique window into the habits and practices that students 
can modify to enhance their learning outcomes. This char -
acteristic makes behavioural data an actionable feature that 
educators can leverage to design interventions aimed at foster -
ing more effective learning behaviours. In contrast, the non -
actionable nature of the other types of data, while valuable 
for context and understanding, does not directly afford such 
opportunities for intervention and improvement in student 
learning strategies.
Building on this, recent discussions in the field emphasise that 
the design and interpretation of behavioural indicators must be 
pedagogically grounded rather than purely data- driven. Gašević, 
Dawson and Siemens (Gašević et al.  2015) argue that LA should 
not focus solely on correlating activity counts, such as total clicks, 
with performance outcomes, as such measures often lack validity 
and actionable value. Instead, behavioural features should be en-
gineered with reference to established theories of learning, such 
as self-  regulated learning (SRL) and metacognition, to ensure 
that they capture meaningful aspects of the learning process. 
Failing to ground LA in a learning theory can result in an arbi -
trary and unfocused selection of data, emphasising information 
that is merely related to learning activities rather than data that 
genuinely influences learning outcomes (Wiley et  al.  2020). By 
grounding data selection in theoretical frameworks, LA can yield 
insights that are genuinely consequential for improving learning, 
supporting the development of targeted and meaningful inter -
ventions. This approach transforms behavioural data from being 
simply observational into an evidence-  based foundation for en -
hancing student learning processes and outcomes.
In addition to this theoretical concern, prior research has also 
shown that prediction models often suffer from limited transfer-
ability across courses because instructional conditions, such as 
course des

===== 202607261523058562.pdf =====
TITLE_META: BAF–FedLLM: Behavior-Aware Federated Modeling of Student Actions via Privacy-Preserving Large Language Model
AUTHOR_META: Wei Ji, Zuobin Ying and Hanying Gan
PAGES: 34
Academic Editor: Iraklis Varlamis
Received: 19 November 2025
Revised: 23 December 2025
Accepted: 30 December 2025
Published: 9 February 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
BAF–FedLLM: Behavior-Aware Federated Modeling of Student
Actions via Privacy-Preserving Large Language Model
Wei Ji 1,2, Zuobin Ying 3,* and Hanying Gan 1,*
1 School of Economics and Finance, Guangdong University of Science and Technology,
Dongguan 523083, China; yc58282@connect.um.edu.mo
2 Faculty of Education, University of Macau, Macao 999078, China
3 Faculty of Data Science, City University of Macau, Macao 999078, China
* Correspondence: zbying@cityu.edu.mo (Z.Y.); ganhanying@gdust.edu.cn (H.G.)
Abstract
Analyzing fine-grained student actions across institutions can drive timely feedback, early
warning, and personalized support, yet it is constrained by privacy regulations, hetero-
geneous curricula, and non-IID behavior logs. This paper introduces BAF–FedLLM, a
behavior-aware federated modeling framework that adapts large language models to next-
action and outcome prediction without centralizing student data. The key idea is to treat
multichannel interaction streams as semantically typed action tokens linked by a learned
ActionGraph, and to align their temporal structure with an LLM through behavior prompts
that inject domain context (task, resource, pedagogy, and affordance cues). We propose
three novel components: (i) BP–FIT, a behavior-prompted federated instruction tuning
scheme that trains low-rank adapters locally and aggregates them with secure masking
and Rényi–DP accounting to ensure client-level privacy; (ii) ProtoAlign, a cross-client
prototype contrastive objective that shares only noisy class-conditional anchors via secure
aggregation to mitigate drift under non-IID partitions; and (iii) CBR, a causal behavior reg-
ularizer that penalizes intervention-sensitive shortcuts by enforcing invariance of predicted
risks across detected instructional regimes. We further derive convergence guarantees
for federated instruction tuning with noisy, partial participation and provide end-to-end
privacy bounds. On three public education datasets (EdNet, ASSISTments, and OULAD)
with institution-level partitions, BAF–FedLLM improves next-action AUC by 4.2–7.1%
over strong federated baselines while reducing expected calibration error by up to 28%
and communication by 5× through adapter sparsity, under a typical privacy budget of
ε ≈ 1.7 at δ = 10−5. These results indicate that behavior-aware prompting and prototype
alignment make LLMs practical for privacy-preserving student action analysis at scale,
offering a principled path to deployable, regulation-compliant analytics across diverse
learning ecosystems.
Keywords: machine learning; federated learning; large language model; privacy protection
MSC: 62R07
1. Introduction
Timely, accurate analysis of student actions can drive feedback, early warnings, and
equitable support across learning platforms. Clickstream logs from homework systems,
MOOCs, and institutional LMSs record not only correctness, but also fine-grained choices
such as revisiting materials, requesting hints, pausing on items, or engaging with policies
Mathematics 2026, 14, 604 https://doi.org/10.3390/math14040604
Mathematics 2026, 14, 604 2 of 34
and forums. Models that anticipate these actions and estimate evolving risk can support
instructors with at-scale triage tools, surface misconceptions earlier, and help institutions
monitor equity gaps across cohorts and curricula. However, the institutions that most need
such analytics—schools, districts, and universities—often cannot centralize logs because of
privacy regulations (e.g., FERPA, GDPR) and local governance constraints, especially when
data span multiple vendors and jurisdictions.
Federated learning offers a natural alternative by keeping logs on institutional servers
and exchanging only model updates. Yet directly applying standard federated optimization
to educational data is problematic. Student behavior is highly heterogeneous: curricula,
pedagogy, and demographics vary across institutions, inducing severe non-IID client
distributions. This heterogeneity can slow or destabilize training, lead to brittle decision
boundaries that overfit dominant regimes, and degrade model calibration in minority
groups. At the same time, modern interaction streams are semantically rich: items and
videos are accompanied by textual stems and solutions, hints and rubrics, forum posts,
syllabus constraints, and institutional policies. Such multimodal, structured context is not
well captured by classical tabular models, but is well-suited to language models that can
reason over text if adapted efficiently and privately.
We pursue a federated approach that explicitly leverages this semantic structure while
respecting institutional privacy. Our starting point is to treat multichannel interactions
as action tokens rendered from typed events and their textual context, and to align their
temporal and structural regularities with a frozen backbone language model. We intro-
duce BAF–FedLLM, a behavior-aware federated framework that trains only lightweight
adapters under client-level differential privacy (DP) while never sharing raw logs. Insti-
tutions locally instantiate an action tokenizer and prompt builder that map clickstream
segments and neighboring educational structure into natural language snippets, which are
then processed by a shared large language model (LLM). This design decouples domain-
specific logging schemas from the backbone, permitting deployment across institutions
with varying platforms while amortizing the cost of pretraining.
The framework is built around three modeling components and a privacy-preserving
training protocol. First, an ActionGraph distills relational and temporal cues—skills, pre-
requisites, course units, policies, and other structural metadata—into compact behavior
prompts. These prompts summarize the ego-net around a student’s current context as short
clauses prepended to the action sequence, steering the frozen backbone toward pedagogi-
cally salient dependencies (e.g., prerequisite chains or unit transitions) without modifying
its core parameters. Second, ProtoAlign combats cross-client drift by privately aggregating
class-conditional prototype anchors via secure aggregation. Each client computes clipped
per-class prototypes in a projected representation space and shares only noised, masked
sums; the server forms global anchors and redistributes them, enabling a supervised con-
trastive loss that pulls local representations toward these shared anchors. Third, CBR
(causal behavior regularization) mitigates regime-specific shortcuts in the risk head by pro-
moting both calibration and invariance across instructional regimes induced fro

===== 202607261545003190.pdf =====
TITLE_META: The 2026 International Conference on Breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence (BAI’26)
AUTHOR_META: Kevin Daimi
PAGES: 338
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems  1907
Kevin Daimi
Abeer Alsadoon    Editors
The 2026 
International 
Conference 
on Breakthroughs in 
Artificial Intelligence 
(BAI’26)
Daimi · Alsadoon   Eds.The 2026 International Conference 
on Breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence (BAI’26)
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems 1907 
Series Editor 
Janusz Kacprzyk , Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, 
Poland 
Advisory Editors 
Fernando Gomide, Department of Computer Engineering and Automation—DCA, 
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering—FEEC, University of Campinas— 
UNICAMP, São Paulo, Brazil 
Okyay Kaynak, Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bogazici 
Univer
sity, Istanbul, Türkiye 
Derong Liu, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University 
of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA 
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 
Witold Pedrycz, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of 
Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland 
Marios M. Polycarpou, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, KIOS 
Resear
ch Center for Intelligent Systems and Networks, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, 
Cyprus 
Imre J. Rudas, Óbuda University, Budapest, Hungary 
Jun Wang, Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, 
Hong 
Kong

===== 202607261807327307.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 17
VFAST Transactions on Software Engineering Volume 11, Issue 4, 2023
 
 
VAWKUM Transactions on Computer Sciences
http://vfast.org/journals/index.php/VTCS@ 2023, ISSN(e): 2308-8168, ISSN(p): 2411-6335 
Volume 11, Number 2, July-December 2023      pp: 
 
 
VFAST Transactions on Software Engineering
https://vfast.org/journals/index.php/VTSE@ 2023, ISSN(e): 2309-3978, ISSN(p): 2411-6246
Clusters of Success: Unpacking Academic
Trends with K-Means Clustering in Education
Dua Agha 1, Areej Fatemah Meghji 1*, Sania Bhatti 1
1Department of Software Engineering, Mehran University of Engineering and Technology
Jamshoro, Pakistan
Keywords: Clustering,
Educational Data
Mining, Machine
Learning, Weka,
K-Means, Student
Performance
Journal Info:
Submitted:
September 26, 2023
Accepted:
October 30, 2023
Published:
November 14, 2023
Abstract
Integrating Educational Data Mining (EDM) into the sector of education has heralded a
new era, profoundly impacting learning outcomes by analyzing student performance and
preventing academic disengagement. Using the K-Means clustering approach, this study
carefully examines the academic accomplishments of students at Mehran University of
Engineering and Technology and offers a sophisticated view of student performance pat-
terns through the rigorous analysis of their learning data. A dataset comprising of the
academic data of three student batches of the Department of Software Engineering was
broken down into the subject categories of Computer Core, General, and Mathematics.
The approach of clustering was then applied to ﬁnd distinct performance patterns across
the three subject categories. The ﬁndings of the research reveal that students have the
highest performance in the computer core category, followed by mathematics, while the
weakest overall performance across all three batches was exhibited in the general sub-
ject category. The study highlights the disparities in academic performance across dis-
tinct clusters and adds to our understanding of academic success while also illuminat-
ing the complex interactions between student characteristics and educational outcomes,
providing useful information for educators and policymakers.
*Correspondence author email address: areej.fatemah@faculty.muet.edu.pk
DOI: 10.21015/vtse.v11i4.1633
Introduction
As a fundamental human right, education is the corner-
stone of personal development, social development,
and national progress. The incorporation of data min-
ing tools into the foundation of education has recently
seen a revolutionary change. The way educational in-
stitutions operate has been revolutionized by the inte-
gration of Educational Data Mining (EDM), which uses
vast data repositories to improve learning outcomes,
forecast student performance, and prevent dropouts.
Education has historically evaluated student com-
prehension through interactions in the classroom,
tests, and instructor feedback. However, the land-
scape of education has changed dramatically since
the introduction of EDM. The multidisciplinary ﬁeld of
education and informatics known as EDM explores
Volume 11, Number 4, October-December 2023                                  pp: 15-31
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. 
15
VFAST Transactions on Software Engineering Volume 11, Issue 4, 2023
extensive educational datasets using methods from
data mining, machine learning, and statistics [1].
These techniques are employed to a diverse range of
data sources, including student records, exam out-
comes, participation in class, and online interactions
[2]. Exploring these statistics, ﬁnding hidden trends,
forecasting academic performance, and comprehend-
ing the learning behaviors of students are all possible
for educators by utilizing the power of EDM.
Predictive modeling and learning analytics are two
examples of cutting-edge research avenues that have
emerged due to the implementation of EDM. Through
the use of EDM and predictive modeling, educational
institutions may forecast outcomes like dropout
rates and identify internal factors that affect student
performance [3]. To optimize learning environments
and educational infrastructure, learning analytics, a
subset of EDM, collects and analyzes student data [4].
Additionally, the use of EDM goes beyond evaluations
of particular students. It is essential for forming
educational policies, addressing challenges between
teachers and students, and improving teaching
strategies [5]. EDM enables customized teaching
approaches, lowers dropout rates, and improves
the overall quality of education by seeing patterns
and trends in the data. In essence, EDM serves as a
beacon, illuminating the path toward a more eﬃcient,
effective, and equitable education system.
In the vast landscape of machine learning, one
fundamental technique that plays a pivotal role in
uncovering intricate patterns within data is ‘Clustering’.
This method, essential in the realm of unsupervised
learning, operates by grouping items based on their
inherent similarities and identiﬁes patterns in unla-
beled data [6]. Unlike classiﬁcation which works on
labeled data, clustering utilizes algorithms to examine
the information and ﬁnd commonalities across data
points, clustering similar occurrences together. The
number of clusters may be set by the user or gener-
ated automatically. Similarities are measured using a
variety of distance metrics. In addition to other things,
this procedure helps with picture analysis, anomaly
detection, and student segmentation. As clustering
reveals hidden structures by examining raw data with-
out previous labeling [7], it enables institutes to make
data-driven decisions and get insightful knowledge
from large datasets.
The main objective of this study is to meticulously
examine the academic accomplishments of students
of Mehran University of Engineering and Technology
across different batches and academic disciplines.
This initiative aims to assess students with a wide
spectrum of academic capabilities and monitor their
performance over the academic year. Through this,
the study aims to extract valuable insights into the
academic outcomes of the students. Employing
clustering will facilitate the detection of concealed
patterns and groups within the dataset. Consequently,
this methodology strives to unveil subtle traits and
trends that possess the potential to signiﬁcantly im-
pact students’ academic achievements. This strategy
aims to help individuals understand the complex
interactions between academic achievement, student
characteristics, and the educational environment by
examining numerous aspects. The strategy utilized
to forecast students’ academic performance inte-
grates the K-means clustering technique, a prevalent
unsupervised machine learning method. K-means
is instrumental in organizing data and identifying
patterns, empowering institutions to derive valuable
insights and make informed, data-driven decisions
[8]. This process ultimately contributes t

===== 202607261820349498.pdf =====
TITLE_META: EM-ITSE210046 58..72
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 15
Exploring students digital activities
and performances through their
activities logged in learning
management system using
educational data mining approach
Adel Bessadok
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, and
Ehab Abouzinadah and Osama Rabie
Faculty of Computing and Information Technology, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to investigate the relationship between the students’ digital activities and their
academic performance through two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, students ’ digital activities were studied and
clustered based on the attributes of their activity log of learning management system (LMS) data set. In the
second stage, the signi ﬁcance of the relationship between these pro ﬁles and the associated academic
performance was tested statistically.
Design/methodology/approach – The LMS delivers E-learning courses and keeps track of the students’
activities. Investigating these students’ digital activities became a real challenge. The diversity of students ’
involvement in the learning process was proven through the LMS which characterize students’ speciﬁc proﬁles.
The Educational Data Mining (EDM) approach was used to discover students’ learning proﬁles and associated
academic performances, where the activity logﬁle exempliﬁed their activities hosted in the LMS. The sample
study data is from an undergraduate e-course hosted on the platform of Blackboard LMS offered at a Saudi
University during theﬁrst semester of the 2019–2020 academic year. The chosen undergraduate course had 25
sections, and the students attending came from science, technology, engineering and math background.
Findings – Results show three clusters based on the digital activities of the students. The correlation test
shows the statistical signiﬁcance and proves the effect of the student’s proﬁle on his academic performance. The
data analysis shows that students with different proﬁles can still get similar academic performance using LMS.
Originality/value – This empirical study emphasizes the importance of the EDM approach using
clustering techniques which can help the instructor understand how students use the provided LMS content
to learn and then can deliver them the best educational experience.
Keywords E-Learning, Digital learning, Learning management systems
Paper type Research paper
1. Introduction
During the COVID-19 pandemic the researchers’ school and many schools across the globe
relied on learning management systems (LMS) to deliver what used to be on-campus classes.
Schools considered classes via LMS to be a good alternative to on-campus classes. LMS was
This article was funded by the Deanship of Scienti ﬁc Research (DSR) at King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah. The authors, therefore, acknowledge with thanks DSR for technical and ﬁnancial support.
ITSE
20,1
58
Received 12 August 2021
Revised 8 October 2021
Accepted 16 October 2021
Interactive Technology and Smart
Education
Vol. 20 No. 1, 2023
pp. 58-72
© Emerald Publishing Limited
1741-5659
DOI 10.1108/ITSE-08-2021-0148
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/1741-5659.htm
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/itse/article-pdf/20/1/58/1237677/itse-08-2021-0148.pdf by King Abdulaziz University user on 21 October 2025
able to become a hub of classes along with other academic activities, e.g. submitting homework
assignments and taking midterm exams. In addition, the premise is that LMS has the ability
to accommodate all learning styles. A hypothesis of this study is that having a different
learning style did not affect the ﬁnal grade of students when using LMS.
A number of studies suggest it is the philosophy of e-learning and its advantage
over traditional learning and their ﬁndings agree with that philosophy (
Azzi et al. ,
2020). Nowadays, one of the main goals of the education system is to improve academic
performance and student satisfaction by using all the necessary and available
technological means ( Dunn and Kennedy, 2019 ). For this reason, many higher education
institutions have initiated the implementation of online learning environments apt of
delivering online education resources in a mixed and blended academic learning
environment.
The important role played by the implementation of the E-learning platform in many
higher education institutions to improve knowledge acquisition, learning perception,
satisfaction and motivation has been manifested in the exponential growth of the use of
LMS (
Aldiab et al.,2 0 1 9; Elfeky et al.,2 0 2 0). One of the most important goals of e-learning in
higher education is to develop a student-centered strategy that can be achieved by
implementing a robust LMS platform that guarantees the improvement of the educational
process.
Different students have different digital activities when interacting with the
learning pedagogies. LMSs (e.g. Blackboard) can supply educators with information
about the way each student interacted with the course ’s pedagogy. The principle is that
teaching each student in the most suitable way for their digital learning activities is of
great bene ﬁt to the student. Therefore, instructors are interested in knowing their
students ’ learning digital activities so they can deliver the best educational experience.
Using arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques helps in enriching the educational
experience of students.
The primary goal of this research is to address the two following research questions:
RQ1. What are the proﬁles of students’ digital activities on LMS?
RQ2. Can students’ academic performance be independent of the proﬁles in RQ1?
Therefore, it is crucial to assess and analyze the data LMS generates. The major ﬁelds of
research devoted to analyzing such data produced from an LMS platform are Educational
Data Mining (EDM) and Learning Analytics (
Aldowah et al.,2 0 1 9). In this conducted study,
we are interested in discovering the learning pro ﬁles of students through their activities
recorded in the LMS as personal pro ﬁles. In addition, we study the relationship between
learning mode and academic performance obtained by testing the difference between these
presumed proﬁles and the grades obtained.
1.1 Paper map
This paper has background information (in Section 2) that shows brief information about
the concepts this study discusses. Section 3 discusses informative related work that studied
students’ digital activities in relation to their academic success. Next, Section 4 discusses the
highlights of the methodology and shows step-by-step how the researchers collected the
data and analyzed it. Next, Section 5 discusses the results showing their implication and
statistical interpretation. Finally, this paper concludes with the concluding remarks
discussing the contribution and remarks of the study in addition to future research direction
that can build on top of the current study.
Digital
activities and
performances

===== 202607262026331100.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Prediction of students’ employability using clustering algorithm: A hybrid approach
AUTHOR_META: N. Premalatha (1Department of Computer Science, Dr. G. R. Damodaran College of Science, Coimbatore, India) and S. Sujatha (1Department of Computer Science, Dr. G. R. Damodaran College of Science, Coimbatore, India)
PAGES: 19
December 28, 2022 10:53 WSPC/262-IJMSSC/S1793-9623 2250049
International Journal of Modeling, Simulation,
and Scientiﬁc Computing
Vol. 13, No. 6 (2022) 2250049 (19 pages)
c⃝ World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company
DOI: 10.1142/S1793962322500490
Prediction of students’ employability using
clustering algorithm: A hybrid approach
N. Premalatha∗ and S. Sujatha†
Department of Computer Science
Dr. G. R. Damodaran College of Science
Coimbatore, India
∗prema.ctlatha@gmail.com
†sujatha.s@grd.edu.in
Received 19 April 2021
Accepted 21 January 2022
Published 12 March 2022
Data Mining is a process of exploring the huge data in search of reliable patterns and
methodical relationship among variables. As a result, the ﬁndings may be validated
through applying the detected patterns to a novel subset of the data. In simple words,
Data Mining is referred as extracting the useful information as large dataset and trans-
forming into reliable structure for future use. Data Mining has shown its incredible per-
formance in various ﬁelds to a greater extent, out of which, Educational Data Mining
(EDM) is one among them. Many researchers have addressed huge number of problems
in EDM and applied various techniques to reveal the useful and hidden information that
helped in the process of decision making. Students getting employed during and after
graduation are one of the important parts of their life. Students, based on their academic
performances, are getting employed in companies they deserve. But still, the probability
of getting employed is very less in this competitive world. In this paper, a real-time sce-
nario has been chosen for analyzing various factors for getting employed/unemployed.
Various clustering and classiﬁcation techniques have been implemented and their per-
formances are studied. A hybrid approach is presented in this paper that integrates the
beneﬁts of particle swarm optimization (PSO) and fuzzy clustering means (FCMs). The
results obtained show that the proposed technique helps in obtaining higher accuracy
to other clustering techniques. The proposed clustering algorithm PSO-FCM, accuracy
is 34.4%, 36.45% and 28.45% higher than the existing method, time complexity shows
45%, 33% and 49% lower than the existing K-means clustering, Na¨ıve Bayes clustering
and SVM clustering algorithms, respectively.
Keywords: Educational data mining; students’ employability prediction; fuzzy clustering
means (FCM); particle swarm optimization (PSO).
1. Introduction
Educational Institutions show utmost care on the students’ employment though on-
campus and oﬀ-campus placement activities. Majority of the students are getting
∗Corresponding author.
2250049-1
Int. J. Model. Simul. Sci. Comput. 2022.13. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by ZHEJIANG UNIVERSITY on 07/26/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
December 28, 2022 10:53 WSPC/262-IJMSSC/S1793-9623 2250049
N. Premalatha & S. Sujatha
placed through pla cement programs. 1 Many companies focus on the hidden tal-
ents before they complete their educatio n and they are being recruited for their
companies. According to a detailed study, many students are getting placed who
are very good in their academics. For those, the placement program acts as a gate-
way in their career.
2 On the other side, the students who belong to the average and
below average are not getting placed during and after their graduation period. On
a detailed analysis, it is found that there are many factors behind this serious issue
and all those have been addressed in this research paper.3 The dataset required for
analysis has been collected from the students pursuing diploma course from various
departments of PSG Polytechnic College, Coimbatore and those who completed
their course of study from the same college in 2019. Data Mining has been chosen
as the eﬀective method for data analysis.
4–7 Hybrid Clustering Approach has been
implemented for obtaining better accuracy and clustering.
1.1. Need and application of the system
The main objective in building this model is to help the students who are not
getting employed during their study and after their graduation. This will help
those students to analyze where they need to improve their skills. This system
will have a main force on students’ performance that results in the increase of
the percentage of employment and rise in the quality intake for the institutions.
Also, this system acts as an eﬀective too l for the teachers where necessary steps
can be taken for the students to get placed in the placement interview and thus
increasing the reputation of the institution. The proposed model will also help the
educators to reframe their existing strategy in order to get better placements that
will increase the employability. PSO is one of the popular optimization techniques
used to obtain eﬀective solution in a very short interval of time. Here, PSO was
merged to enlarge performance and also t o protect the unique features of FCM.
This hybrid combination prohibits early convergence and also obtained at more
accurate value of kappa statistics, showing that probable model is very successful in
predicting the employment category. Fuzzy clustering ofC-means is soft clustering
strategy, in which every data point is allocated probability or probability score
of belonging to that group. PSO may execute global searches across the whole
search space through quicker convergence speed. It allows automatic control of
inertial weight, acceleration coeﬃcient s as well as other algorithmic parameters
at runtime, thus enhancing search eﬃciency and performance at equal time. PSO
has been utilized for numerous real-world engineering cases, particularly structural
engineering issues.
The main beneﬁts of PSO algorithm ar e mentioned in easy concept, simple
execution, robustness of control parameters and computational performance likened
to mathematic algorithm and other heuristic optimization processes. So, the author
chooses this PSO and FCM model for clustering.
2250049-2
Int. J. Model. Simul. Sci. Comput. 2022.13. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by ZHEJIANG UNIVERSITY on 07/26/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

===== 202607271537274409.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 23
JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING 38, 1109-1131 (2022)
DOI: 10.6688/JISE.202211 38(6).0002
Exploring Time-Related Micro-Behavioral Patterns
in a Python Programming Online Course
HSI-MIN CHEN 1, BAO-AN NGUYEN 2,+, CHYI -R EN DOW1,
NIEN -LIN HSUEH 1 AND AN-CHI LIU 1
1Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science
Feng Chia University
Taichung, 40724 Taiwan
E-mail: {hsiminc, acliu}@fcu.edu.tw, {crdow, nlhsueh}@mail.fcu.edu.tw
2Department of Information Technology
Tra Vinh University
Tra Vinh, 87000 Viet Nam
E-mail: annb@tvu.edu.vn+
Modelling learning behaviors and predicting student performance in massive open on-
line courses (MOOCs) are vital for adaptive course planning and personalized intervention.
This study proposes a new approach for discovering time-embedded behavioral patterns in
micro behaviors of MOOC learners and incorporating them as features for student profil-
ing and learning performance prediction. We embedded discretized time intervals into in-
teraction sequences and used n-gram extraction to output time-related behavioral patterns.
With log data from a Python programming MOOC with 591 learners, we exploited ex-
ploration data analysis, unsupervised, and supervised learning to elucidate the associations
between time-related behavioral patterns and academic performance. Nine out of seventeen
targeted patterns are highly correlated with the final grade, in which, three patterns related
to the help-seeking, evaluation, and study activities with short or medium intervals (less
than two minutes) are strong predictors of academic performance in a very early stage. The
time-related behavioral patterns also serve as good features for clustering learners into three
groups based on learning behaviors: Sampling learners, Comprehensive learners, and Tar-
geting learners. Our empirical results show the usability of the proposed time-embedded
behavioral patterns in immediate diagnosis learners’ engagement, raising new challenges
for learning analytics with time concerning to achieve precision education.
Keywords: MOOCs, learning analytics, time-embedded n-grams, time-related behavioral
patterns, student performance prediction
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, MOOCs has become an important learning environment for com-
puter science students. Courses related to computer science and programming are always
in the list of most popular MOOCs of all time [1]. However, besides obvious benefits
from the open online form of learning, MOOCs also encounter challenges related to their
intrinsic nature, which are high dropout and low completion/success rates. In the past few
Received November 1, 2021; revised December 20, 2021; accepted January 12, 2022.
Communicated by Shin-Jie Lee.
+Corresponding author.
1109
1110 H SI-M IN CHEN , BAO-A N NGUYEN , C HYI -REN DOW, N IEN -L IN HSUEH , A N-CHI LIU
years, researchers have paid remarkable attention to modeling student behaviors, develop-
ing predictive models to finding out factors that influence academic performance, dropout,
and success/failure of students in courses. The prediction of student success enhances the
performance of MOOCs in a variety of tasks. First, it supports individualized timely inter-
ventions by determining actionable factors that can improve the learning experiences of
students. Second, it is beneficial in adaptive content and learner pathways by presenting
course content and learning experiences that were optimized for student success. Third,
building prediction models help to understand the data such as learner behaviors, learner
attributes, and course attributes. Explainable prediction models provide useful insights
behind the outcomes that enable interventions to reach the success of both the learners
and the courses [2].
Among types of data extracted from MOOCs platforms, clickstreams data and
concept-oriented assignments are best predictors for student performance [3]. Click-
streams contain a variety of meta-data that allows reconstructing student behaviors by
several schemes and extraction of meaningful features from discrete events under every
mouse-clicks like page load, video play/stop/pause/skip, assessment submit, forum posts,
etc. [2]. The common way is constructing counting-based activity features, i.e., number
of viewed videos, number of tried assessments, number of questions in the forum , etc.
However, since counting features did not capture dynamic behaviors of students, the in-
terventions would be limited in improving the frequency/quantity of learning activities
associated with these summative features [4].
In a more advanced way, dynamic behaviors are modelled in form of higher-order
activity-based features. The features are extracted from sequences of clicks/activities and
named as interpretable behaviors [5–7]. For example, the help-seeking pattern might oc-
cur when a student starts playing a lecture video while doing an exercise [8]; a rewatch
pattern occurs when a student is repeatedly pressing seek-back and play buttons in a lec-
ture video [9]. Discovery of these features requires complex data analytics techniques or
advanced tools like frequent sequential pattern mining [10] , process mining [8,11], motif
identification [12] ,n-gram extraction [9,13,14], etc. Moreover, interpreting the sequential
patterns as learning behaviors required deep expertise. In return, the high-order activity-
based features have shown their contribution in improving prediction performance and
offering more precise interventions based on effective dynamic behaviors [3, 14].
Despite their success, existing studies using high-order activity-based features in
MOOCs only consider the presence of specific activity/actions in clickstreams without
inspecting the time intervals between them, even time-gap is an intrinsic attribute of in-
teraction sequences. Given a sequence of actions, the intervals between actions intuitively
reveal how a learner is dealing with the current learning object. For example, the inter-
vals between two consecutive submit actions in an assessment give us some implications
about the difficulty of the problem (i.e., easy problems can be solved in a shorter time or
vice versa, etc .) or the academic performance of learners (i.e., better students can solve
the problems in a shorter time or vice versa, etc .). It is no doubt that analysis on the
time aspect of interaction sequences can gain meaningful insights for behavior steering in
MOOCs.
To fulfill this research gap, we propose a novel temporal sequence mining approach
to explore the time-related behavioral patterns in MOOCs. Discretized time gaps are
augmented into the interaction sequence prior to n-gram extraction to construct time-

===== 202607271908578379.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Explainability in Educational Data Mining and Learning Analytics: An Umbrella Review
AUTHOR_META: Sachini Gunasekara, Mirka Saarela
PAGES: 7
This is a self-archived version of an original article. This version 
may differ from the original in pagination and typographic details. 
Author(s): 
Title: 
Year: 
Version:
Copyright:
Rights:
Rights url: 
Please cite the original version:
Gunasekara, Sachini; Saarela, Mirka
© 2024 Copyright is held by the author(s).
Gunasekara, S., & Saarela, M. (2024). Explainability in Educational Data Mining and Learning
Analytics : An Umbrella Review.  In B. Paaßen, & C. Demmans Epp (Eds.), Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (pp. 887-892). International
Educational Data Mining Society. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.12729987
Explainability in Educational Data Mining and Learning Analytics : An Umbrella Review
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Published version
CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
2024
Explainability in Educational Data Mining and Learning
Analytics: An Umbrella Review
Sachini Gunasekara
Faculty of Information Technology
University of Jyväskylä
savisama@jyu.fi
Mirka Saarela
Faculty of Information Technology
University of Jyväskylä
mirka.saarela@jyu.fi
ABSTRACT
This paper presents an umbrella review synthesizing the
findings of explainability studies within the Educational Data
Mining (EDM) and Learning Analytics (LA) domains. By
systematically reviewing existing reviews and adhering to
the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines, we identified 49 sec-
ondary studies, culminating in a final corpus of 10 stud-
ies for rigorous systematic review. This approach offers a
comprehensive overview of the current state of explainabil-
ity research in educational models, providing insights into
methodologies, techniques, outcomes, and the effectiveness
of explainability implementations in educational contexts,
including the impact of data types, models, and metrics on
explainability. Our analysis unveiled that latent variables,
already offering a higher semantic level, are typically easier
to interpret, but observed variables can increase actionabil-
ity. Moreover, while older studies accentuate the benefits
of decision tree models for their intrinsic explainability and
minimal need for additional explanation techniques, recent
research favors more complex models and post-hoc explana-
tion methods. Surprisingly, not a single publication in our
corpus discussed metrics for evaluating the effectiveness or
quality of explanations. However, a subset of articles in our
collection addressed metrics for model performance and fair-
ness in educational settings. Selecting optimal data types,
models, and metrics promises to enhance transparency, in-
terpretability, and accessibility for educators and students
alike.
Keywords
explainable artificial intelligence, educational data mining,
learning analytics, explainability, umbrella review
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
technologies in educational settings has garnered significant
attention for its potential to revolutionize teaching and learn-
ing practices [9]. However, the black-box nature of AI al-
gorithms often presents challenges in understanding and in-
terpreting their decision-making processes, particularly in
the context of Educational Data Mining (EDM) and Learn-
ing Analytics (LA). Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)
has emerged as a promising approach to address this issue
by providing insights into how AI models arrive at their con-
clusions [7, 23]. It tries to foster confidence in automated
procedures by providing clear insights into the workings of
AI algorithms. Through this, it enables, for example, early
intervention for troubling students [16], personalized learn-
ing experiences [1, 10], and well-informed decision-making
in educational contexts by ensuring the interpretability of
AI systems [30]. In general, the use of XAI in education
is designed to optimize learning outcomes and advance ed-
ucational fairness by combining the benefits of AI with a
comprehensive grasp of its decision-making processes [17].
This paper conducts an umbrella review, synthesizing exist-
ing reviews of explainability studies within the EDM and LA
fields. By systematically analyzing the findings of multiple
reviews, this study aims to offer a comprehensive overview of
the current landscape of explainability research in EDM and
LA, identify key trends and challenges, and provide insights
for future research directions to enhance the interpretability
and transparency of AI-driven educational technologies.
2. METHODOLOGY
The approach for employing Systematic Literature Review
(SLR) methodology was developed in accordance with the
guidelines established by [8]. As research studies on XAI
increase across various application domains, the underlying
knowledge becomes progressively disorganized [33]. A min-
imal amount of secondary research, nevertheless, has been
carried out with the specific objective of organizing the pro-
fuse knowledge about explainability methods and the chal-
lenges associated with LA and EDM. As a result, it is essen-
tial to conduct an SLR to compile, analyze, and present a
comprehensive and unbiased overview of the secondary ar-
ticles regarding the role and significance of explainability in
LA and EDM.
2.1 Research questions
The following research questions (RQs) were developed in
light of the need to perform the SLR of the existing ap-
proaches for delivering explainable EDM or LA and their
assessments in various applications and activities in educa-
tion:
S. Gunasekara and M. Saarela. Explainability in educational data
mining and learning analytics: An umbrella review. In B. Paaßen
and C. D. Epp, editors, Proceedings of the 17th International Con-
ference on Educational Data Mining , pages 887–892, Atlanta, Geor-
gia, USA, July 2024. International Educational Data Mining Society.
© 2024 Copyright is held by the author(s). This work is distributed
under the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial NoDeriva-
tives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) license.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.12729987

===== 202607271909329323.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Calibrated early-warning models with fairness auditing and selective prediction for course withdrawal risk: Evidence from OULAD
AUTHOR_META: Suhan Wu
PAGES: 20
PLOS One | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0352867 July 15, 2026 1 / 20
 
 OPEN ACCESS
Citation: Wu S, Duan J, Luo M (2026) 
Calibrated early-warning models with fairness 
auditing and selective prediction for course 
withdrawal risk: Evidence from OULAD. PLoS 
One 21(7): e0352867. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0352867
Editor: John Sum, National Chung Hsing 
University, TAIWAN
Received: March 9, 2026
Accepted: June 16, 2026
Published: July 15, 2026
Copyright: © 2026 Wu et al. This is an open 
access article distributed under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution License, 
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, 
and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.
Data availability statement: The data under-
lying the results are publicly available as the 
Open University Learning Analytics Dataset 
(OULAD; doi:10.1038/sdata.2017.171). The 
code used to reproduce all analyses and figures 
reported in this study is publicly archived on 
Zenodo (doi:10.5281/zenodo.20388848).
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Calibrated early-warning models with fairness 
auditing and selective prediction for course 
withdrawal risk: Evidence from OULAD
Suhan Wu 1☯, Jingyi Duan2☯, Min Luo 3*
1 School of Economics and Management, Nanjing Polytechnic Institute, Nanjing, China, 2 College of Life 
and Health, Nanjing Polytechnic Institute,   Nanjing, China, 3 School of Management, Shenzhen University 
of Information Technology,   Shenzhen, China 
☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.
* luom@suit-sz.edu.cn
Abstract 
Early-warning systems (EWS) in learning analytics are increasingly used to identify 
learners at risk of course withdrawal, but their deployment-critical properties are often 
under-reported once predicted scores are converted into intervention policies. This 
study develops a deployment-oriented evaluation protocol for course-withdrawal risk 
using the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD). An early-window 
feature set was constructed from the first four weeks of learner activity and evaluated 
under a group-wise train–test split by course presentation. Multiple classifiers were 
benchmarked, including logistic regression, histogram-based gradient boosting (HGB), 
random forest, support vector machine, AdaBoost, K-nearest neighbors, XGBoost, 
LightGBM, and CatBoost. A calibrated HGB model was then retained as the main prob-
abilistic model for downstream analyses of probability reliability, threshold sensitivity, 
subgroup fairness with bootstrap uncertainty, selective prediction, and capacity-based 
Top-x% alerting. Several tree-based and boosting models achieved comparable held-
out discrimination, while calibrated HGB remained competitive across classification, 
ranking, and probability-reliability metrics. Threshold choices substantially changed the 
precision–recall balance, indicating that operating points should be treated as pol-
icy choices rather than universal defaults. Fairness audits showed policy-dependent 
observed group-level differences, especially in alert rates for disability status, although 
several subgroup error-rate and positive predictive value (PPV) differences remained 
uncertain. Selective prediction reduced risk on accepted cases as coverage decreased, 
whereas Top-x% alerting fixed outreach volume and made workload–effectiveness 
trade-offs explicit. Robustness analyses supported the 28-day window as a practical 
early-warning compromise and showed that absolute PPV values varied across held-
out course-presentation splits. The findings suggest that EWS should be evaluated as 
policy-linked decision systems, integrating model benchmarking, calibration, fairness 
uncertainty, and capacity-aware decision rules before deployment.

PLOS One | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0352867 July 15, 2026 2 / 20
Introduction
Course withdrawal remains a persistent challenge in digitally mediated higher and 
distance education. It reduces learning opportunities for students and creates oper-
ational pressure for institutions that must allocate limited advising, tutoring, and 
support resources. Early-warning systems (EWS) have therefore become a prom-
inent application of learning analytics, using digital traces such as virtual learning 
environment (VLE) interactions, assessment submissions, and activity logs to identify 
learners who may benefit from timely support [1–3]. In this context, predictive models 
are valuable not because they produce risk scores in isolation, but because those 
scores are translated into concrete intervention decisions.
Much of the early-warning literature evaluates models primarily through discrimi-
nation metrics such as ROC–AUC or through general classification accuracy [4–6]. 
These metrics are important, but they do not fully address deployment. In practice, 
institutions must decide when to trigger alerts, how many learners can be contacted, 
and how uncertainty should be handled when early-semester evidence is incomplete. 
A model with acceptable ranking performance may still be poorly calibrated, may 
produce different subgroup error profiles under different decision rules, or may gen-
erate more alerts than available advising capacity can support. Thus, the deployment 
readiness of an early-warning model depends not only on predictive performance, but 
also on probability reliability, threshold behavior, fairness under explicit policies, and 
workload-aware decision design.
This gap between common benchmarking practice and deployment needs 
becomes especially salient when probabilistic scores are treated as risk estimates. 
Two models with similar ROC–AUC can rank learners similarly, yet differ substantially 
in probability reliability. Poor calibration can distort threshold-based alerting and make 
risk scores difficult to interpret for triage or communication [7,8]. In addition, because 
EWS outputs can create unequal exposure to false positives and false negatives, 
subgroup differences in decision rates and error rates should be audited under the 
actual policies used in deployment [9]. When early evidence is noisy and institutions 
cannot intervene on every learner, selective prediction provides a principled way to 
trade coverage for reduced risk by abstaining on lower-confidence cases [10].
This study examines course-withdrawal prediction from this deployment-oriented 
perspective. Using the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD) [11], the 
analysis constructs early-window features from VLE engagement, assessment- 
derived signals, and learner background covariates, and evaluates withdrawal pre-
diction under a group-wise split by course presentation. The empirical benchmark 
covers multiple classifiers, including logistic regression, histogram-based gradient 
boosting (HGB), random forest, support vector machine, AdaBoost, K-nearest neigh-
bors, XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost. A calibrated HGB model is then retained 
as the main prob

===== 202607271914347037.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Predictive Modelling with the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD): A Systematic Literature Review
AUTHOR_META: Lingxi Jin 
PAGES: 8
Predictive Modelling with the Open University
Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD):
A Systematic Literature Review
Lingxi Jin1 , Y ao Wang2, Huiying Song3, and Hyo-Jeong So 1(B)
1 Department of Educational Technology, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea
{jinlingxi,hyojeongso}@ewha.ac.kr
2 National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
nie23.wy3836@e.ntu.edu.sg
3 Department of Computer Science, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea
shy114@ewha.ac.kr
Abstract. Higher education has experienced an unparalleled digital transforma-
tion, driven by the widespread adoption of online learning with massive users,
which has risen to an explosive growth in the generation and analysis of student-
related data. Within this transformation, predictive modeling has emerged as a
useful tool for predicting critical indicators in the learning process, encompassing
students’ academic performance, class retention, and dropout rates. With this back-
drop, this study aims to conduct a systematic review of recent publications focused
on predictive modeling, with a speciﬁc emphasis on the Open University Learning
Analytics Datasets (OULAD). Following the PRISMA process, we identiﬁed 17
research articles published from 2017 to 2024, concentrating on OULAD in higher
education. For our analysis, we categorized the purpose of predictive modeling into
three types: (a) predicting students’ performance, (b) identifying at-risk students,
and (c) predicting student engagement. The central focus lies on the identiﬁcation
of algorithms predominantly employed in these studies, including machine learn-
ing, deep learning, and statistical models. By investigating the methodologies and
algorithms employed, this review informs researchers in learning analytics and
educational data mining of the potential opportunities and challenges associated
with predictive modeling using OULAD in higher education.
Keywords: Predictive modelling · Open University Learning Analytics Dataset
(OULAD) · Educational data mining (EDM)
1 Introduction
With the widespread adoption of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), the scale of
student data collection has reached unprecedented levels. Educational institutions now
have access to vast amounts of data on students’ learning patterns, preferences, and
progress. This wealth of data enables educators to personalize instruction, ultimately
enhancing student engagement and success. This digital revolution has not only trans-
formed the delivery methods of instruction but has also given rise to the ﬁeld dedicated to
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. M. Olney et al. (Eds.): AIED 2024 Workshops, CCIS 2150, pp. 477–484, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64315-6
_46
478 L. Jin et al.
examining learner data. Learning analytics [4], academic analytics and educational data
mining [7] are three prominent ﬁelds in the domain of leveraging learner-generated data
and analytical models to uncover valuable insights into learning processes. In particular,
learning analytics focuses on utilizing these data to unpack learning processes and social
connections while making predictions and recommendations about learning outcomes
[18].
Within this context, the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD)
which is publicly accessible, becomes a valuable resource for predictive modeling.
OULAD includes a wealth of learning-related data, such as study duration, access fre-
quency, and course grades, offering researchers valuable insights into student learning
behaviors [13]. The data of OULAD is utilized to model training that is authentic and reli-
able, supporting the development of future virtual learning environments and enabling
other educational institutions to use the data to innovate and develop their instructional
methods. However, several challenges persist in the practical implementation of predic-
tive modeling, including the quality and integrity of data, the efﬁcacy of feature selection,
as well as the complexity and interpretability of models [ 13].
With this backdrop, this paper aims to provide a systematic literature review of pre-
dictive modeling research using OULAD. By investigating the methods and algorithms
employed, this review seeks to inform researchers in learning analytics and educational
data mining of the potential opportunities and challenges associated with predictive
modeling using OULAD in higher education. The research questions that guided this
study are as follows: RQ1: What are the research trends of the predictive modeling using
OULAD? RQ2: What are the research themes in predictive modeling using OULAD?
RQ3: What prediction models are used in OULAD in the literature?
2 Methods
2.1 Data Sources and Search Strategy
This systematic review followed the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for System-
atic Reviews and Meta-analyses) 2020 guidelines to ensure the rigor in reporting [ 16].
A wide range of databases was used as our primary source, including IEEE Xplore,
Scopus, ScienceDirect, and Web of Science. ERIC and ProQuest were included as addi-
tional sources to expand the literature in the educational context relevant to our study. We
selected these databases since most publication channels led by the Society of Learn-
ing Analytics Research (SoLAR), the International Educational Data Mining Society
(IEDMS), and the International Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education Society (IAIED) are
available in these databases. The literature search was conducted in Dec 2023 using two
sets of search terms as shown in Table 1. The ﬁrst set of search terms consists of differ-
ent variations of the term OULAD. The second set includes terms related to predictive
modelling. In total, 3,062 papers that contain the two sets of search terms within the title
and abstract were identiﬁed in the initial search process.

===== 202608101414263562.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 27
Introduction
Machine learning (ML), as a core component of Artificial Intelligence (AI), has gained significant importance 
across various domains, particularly in the development of intelligent and sustainable built environments. The rapid 
advancement of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, combined with AI, has enabled the transformation of 
conventional buildings into smart, data-driven systems that enhance efficiency and sustainability. These developments 
are driven by global challenges such as increasing energy demand, climate change, and the need for environmentally 
Vol. 17, No. 2, 388-414, https://doi.org/10.22712/susb.20260022
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
SUSTAINABLE Building Technology and Urban Development
pISSN 2093-761X･eISSN 2093-7628
IoT sensor-based AI framework for sustainable building 
performance optimization using random forest prediction 
modeling
Parneet Kaur1, Deepali Gupta2* and Mudita Uppal3
1Research Scholar, Chitkara University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Chitkara University, Punjab, India
2Professor, Chitkara University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Chitkara University, Punjab, India
3Assistant Professor, School of Computer Science and Engineering, IILM University, Greater Noida, UP, India
*Corresponding author: deepali.gupta@chitkara.edu.in
A B S T R A C T
The growing need for sustainable and energy-efficient built environments requires intelligent systems 
for real-time monitoring and optimization of building performance. This study presents an IoT 
sensor-based artificial intelligence (AI) framework for sustainable building performance optimization 
using Random Forest prediction modeling for crop recommendation and XGBoost for fertilizer 
suggestion. The proposed framework integrates data from IoT-enabled sensors, including temperature, 
humidity, air quality, occupancy, and energy consumption, to enable data-driven decision-making in 
smart buildings. Machine learning models such as Decision Tree, Random Forest, and XGBoost are 
employed to predict optimal operational conditions for enhancing environmental performance and 
resource efficiency. The datasets, derived from publicly available sources and simulated 
building 
environments, ensure accessibility and reproducibility. Model performance is evaluated using standard 
metrics, including accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. Among the models, Random Forest achieves
the highest accuracy of 99.55%, outperforming Decision Tree and XGBoost for crop suggestion, and 
XGBoost achieves a higher accuracy 99.46% for fertilizer suggestion than Random Forest and 
Decision Tree. The proposed approach supports sustainable building management by improving 
energy efficiency, indoor environmental quality, and operational decision-making. It aligns with key 
aspects of environmental performance assessment, facility management, and smart urban development.
Future work may incorporate deep learning and hybrid models to enhance scalability across diverse 
building types and climatic conditions.
Received: 14 May 2026
Accepted: 8 June 2026
Keywords: artificial intelligence; machine learning; decision tree; XGBoost; smart building; smart 
farming; sustainability; predictive modeling; random forest
Ⓒ 2026 International Journal of Sustainable Building Technology and Urban Development. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits unrestricted non- 
commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
P. Kaur et al.∙ 389
responsible urban infrastructure. The built environment 
plays a critical role in global energy consumption and 
environmental impact, necessitating the adoption of 
intelligent technologies to optimise performance. IoT- 
enabled devices including environmental sensors, smart 
meters, and occupancy detectors facilitate continuous 
monitoring of key building parameters such as tem-
perature, humidity, air quality, lighting conditions, and 
energy usage. The data collected from these systems 
supports real-time decision-making and predictive analy-
tics, enabling efficient resource utilization and improved 
indoor environmental quality [1]. AI-driven models, 
including Decision Tree, Random Forest, and XGBoost, 
further enhance the capability of these systems by 
predicting optimal operational conditions and supporting 
automated control strategies. The integration of IoT 
sensing and ML techniques represents a significant 
step toward sustainable building management, enabling 
adaptive, scalable, and intelligent solutions for smart 
buildings and urban environments. Figure 1 illustrates 
key applications of IoT in smart building systems and 
highlights their role in advancing sustainable and 
resilient infrastructure.
T h e  M L  alg o rithm  wo rk s with  n om in al h um an 
intervention. These algorithms are capable of mining 
knowledge from data, detecting and reading patterns 
and generating logical inferences. In this field, various 
models work on heterogeneous datasets to increase 
predictive accuracy and decision-making. Various devices 
are used for data collection, such as drones, images 
obtained from vines, and the readings of smart devices 
installed on the ground [2]. In this study, the IoT 
datasets were used for the execution of ML algorithms. 
Traditional farming practices are being redefined by 
AI and ML [3-6] algorithms, which are at the core 
of this change. 
Innovative levels of intelligence in agricultural 
operations are enabled by these systems’ ability to 
interpret and process large amounts of data. These 
developments improve crop yield and productivity, 
maintain soil fertility, reduce dependency on labor, 
and reduce pesticide waste and water. A crop and 
fertilizer recommendation-based AI system enables 
farmers to make more precise decisions by automating 
decision-making, predicting crop and fertilizer in 
advance [7]. Consequently, farming is becoming pro-
gressively more data-driven, which improves agricul-
tural production results and optimizes resource use. 
Technology is becoming an essential tool in modern 
agriculture, and another key innovation of this digital 
transformation is the Internet of Things. An IoT [8] 
system uses sensors to collect real-time data using a 
network and smart devices. The ongoing stream of 
information and data processing enables farmers to 
respond with speed and efficiency to changes in their 
fields. Figure 2 shows an application where machine 
learning is applied for agricultural purposes. 
The usage of AI in agriculture is still restricted due 
to its high prices, and the lack of knowledge on how to 
use technology and handle the large amount of data 
accuracy and security is also a big issue in using 
technology in agriculture [9, 10]. Although agricultural 
automation and emerging technologies such as 

===== 202608101420197258.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Applications of Machine Learning for at‐Risk Student Prediction in Online Education: A 10‐Year Systematic Review of Literature
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 21
1 of 21Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 2025; 41:e70058
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.70058
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning
REVIEW ARTICLE
Applications of Machine Learning for at- Risk Student 
Prediction in Online Education: A 10- Year Systematic 
Review of Literature
Hui Shi  |  Nuodi Zhang  |  Secil Caskurlu  |  Hunhui Na
Department of Educational Psychology and Learning Systems, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA
Correspondence:  Hui Shi (hshi2@fsu.edu ) | Secil Caskurlu ( scaskurlu@fsu.edu )
Received:  6 September 2024 | Revised:  2 May 2025 | Accepted:  6 May 2025
Funding:  The authors received no specific funding for this work.
Keywords: at-  risk student | deep learning | distance education and online learning | machine learning | systematic review
ABSTRACT
Background: The growth of online education has provided flexibility and access to a wide range of courses. However, the self-  
paced and often isolated nature of these courses has been associated with increased dropout and failure rates. Researchers employed 
machine learning approaches to identify at- risk students, but multiple issues have not been addressed concerning the definition of 
at- risk students, as well as the strengths and limitations of different machine learning models to predict at- risk students.
Objectives: This systematic review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the past 10-  year research focusing on applying 
machine learning techniques for predicting at-  risk students (i.e., failure, dropouts) in online learning environments.
Methods: Studies were extracted from the ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore Digital Library, Web of Science, ERIC, ProQuest, 
and EBSCO. A total of 161 studies published from 2014 to 2024 were included in the review.
Results and Conclusions: Findings revealed (1) four primary at- risk definitions outlined in the reviewed studies, each focusing 
on specific stages of student engagement and performance in a course; (2) most studies relied on student behavioural engagement 
and academic factors as at-  risk predictors; (3) the adoption of deep learning and ensemble deep learning networks has signif -
icantly increased in the past 5 years, often outperforming classical machine learning models. While studies in which classical 
machine learning excelled often relied on the ensemble methodology and smaller sample sizes; (4) current machine learning 
practice evaluated by a list of criteria showed concerns regarding reproducibility, generalisability, and interpretability.
1   |   Introduction
Online learning has garnered growing attention in the past 
few decades for expanding traditional education capacity 
and increasing access to courses with varying learning levels 
(Anderson  2004; Mayer  2019). Despite its benefits, students 
often struggle with engagement due to limited academic and 
emotional support and reduced interactions with teachers be -
cause of the self-  regulated nature of online courses (Psathas 
et al.  2023; Wen and Juan  2024), which leads to higher failure 
and dropout rates (Waheed et al.  2023). Previous research has 
emphasised the importance of predicting at-  risk students and 
the need for interventions to enhance students' engagement and 
success (Delnoij et al.  2020). In this study, ‘at- risk’ students refer 
to those likely to fail or drop out of their courses.
Recently, machine learning (ML) applications have been rev -
olutionised by deep learning (DL) in various fields. DL is a 
subfield of ML, which is characterised by multi-  layered neural 
networks (Chauhan and Singh  2018). While DL has experienced 
tremendous breakthroughs, classical machine learning (cML) 
approaches (e.g., random forest [RF], decision trees, support 
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

2 of 21 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 2025
vector machine [SVM]) continue to be extremely relevant and 
successful, particularly in  situations that include structured 
data and characteristics that are well specified (Degadwala and 
Vyas  2024). With the extensive data produced in online learning 
environments, researchers recommend leveraging ML to auto -
matically detect students at risk based on behaviour patterns 
within existing datasets (Chui et al.  2020; Zakaria et al.  2022). 
Figure  1 summarises the commonly used cML and DL models 
for predicting at-  risk students based on our systematic review. 
However, current studies have not addressed multiple issues 
concerning the field, such as lack of (a) clarification on the 
definition of at-  risk students; (b) comparisons of strengths and 
limitations of different cML and DL models; and (c) revealing 
the practice of ML applications regarding the necessity, repro -
ducibility, robustness, generalisability, and interpretability. 
Therefore, this systematic review aims to provide a compre -
hensive overview of the application of cML and DL models in 
online learning research for predicting at-  risk students, as well 
as recommendations for enhancing practices in ML studies in 
educational research.
1.1   |   At- Risk Student Prediction in Online 
Education: Significance and Complexity
As mentioned earlier, investing in predicting at-  risk students is 
important because of the negative impacts of high dropout rates 
on both students and institutions. Negative experiences can 
lower students' confidence and persistence in learning and dis -
courage them from taking more online courses (Abdous  2019). 
For institutions, each student represents a significant invest -
ment, and losing students to drop out can result in a substantial 
loss of resources (Bernardo et al. 2016 ).
Despite its importance, at- risk student prediction is yet to mature 
because of the lack of shared understanding of at-  risk students 
and the complexity of student data. First, at-  risk student predic-
tion is classified as binary in the literature, indicating that ‘1’ re-
fers to an at- risk student and ‘0’ represents a competent student. 
However, what constitutes an at- risk student varies across stud -
ies. Some studies defined students as at-  risk if they had no par -
ticipation record in the last phase of a course (e.g., Monllaó Olivé 
et al.  2020; Zakaria et al.  2022), while others used academic per-
formance metrics, such as the assignment cutoff grade (e.g., Al-  
Sulami et al.  2023). Having a clear definition of at-  risk students 
is crucial as it guides the selection of relevant data and the design 
of predictive algorithms. Second, the identification of the predic-
tors associated with at-  risk students is important for enhancing 
the accuracy of prediction models, but it is inconsistent among 
studies (Evangelista  2021; Hessen et al.  2022). To note, high pre-
dictive accuracy is not the only purpose of informing effective 
interventions for at- risk students; it is also important to provide 
an explainable framework for the selection of specific predictors 
(Alamri and Alharbi  2021). Fi

===== 255_A+Hybrid+Machine+Learning+Framework+for+Predicting+Students’+Performance+in+Virtual+Learning+Environment.pdf =====
TITLE_META: International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET) – eISSN: 1863-0383 – Vol. 16, No. 24, 2021
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 18
Paper—A Hybrid Machine Learning Framework for Predicting Students’ Performance in Virtual… 
A Hybrid Machine Learning Framework for Predicting 
Students’ Performance in Virtual Learning Environment 
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v16i24.26151 
Edmund D. Evangelista 
Zayed University, Abu Dhabi Campus, United Arab Emirates 
edmund.evangelista@zu.ac.ae 
Abstract—Virtual Learning Environments (VLE), such as Moodle and  
Blackboard, store vast data to help identify students' performance and engage-
ment. As a result, researchers have been focusing their efforts on assisting edu-
cational institutions in providing machine learning models to predict at -risk stu-
dents and to impr ove their performance. However, it requires an efficient ap-
proach to construct a model that can ultimately provide accurate predictions. 
Consequently, this study proposed a hybrid machine learning framework to pre-
dict students' performance using eight classification algorithms and three ensem-
ble methods (Bagging, Boosting, Voting) to determine the best -performing pre-
dictive model. In addition, this study used filter-based and wrapper-based feature 
selection techniques to select the best features of the data set related to students' 
performance. The obtained results reveal that the ensemble methods recorded 
higher predictive accuracy when compared to single classifiers. Furthermore, the 
accuracy of the models improved due to the feature selection techniques utilized 
in this study. 
Keywords—machine learning, Weka, predictive model, ensemble, student per-
formance prediction, classification algorithm, virtual learning 
1 Introduction 
The COVID -19 pandemic has affected many educational institutions in terms of 
their im plemented teaching and learning pedagogies. Several schools, colleges, and 
universities have discontinued face -to-face teachings [1]. Instead, most universities 
shifted to virtual and digital strategies [2] using their chosen Virtual Learning Environ-
ment (VLE) platforms such as Blackboard, Canvas, and Moodle. VLE is a platform 
that allows students and teachers to interact, present, and share resources/activities to 
complete an entire online course or serves as a supporting feature in traditional teaching 
courses [3] [4]. 
Many universities have fully digitalized their operations [5], enabling faculty and 
students to carry out teaching and learning experiences amid the pandemic. Due to the 
significant demand for VLEs brought about by the lockdown of schools, s tudent per-
formance prediction and analysis is an essential task [6] that serves as supportive tools 
iJET ‒ Vol. 16, No. 24, 2021
255
Paper—A Hybrid Machine Learning Framework for Predicting Students’ Performance in Virtual… 
to educators and metacognitive triggers to learners [7]. Prediction using machine learn-
ing techniques has enormous potential to assist faculty in identifyin g students' poor 
performance by enabling an early warning system [8]. Machine learning (ML) aims at 
creating algorithms that can learn and generate statistical models for data analysis and 
prediction. The ML algorithms should learn on their own, based on t he data provided, 
and make accurate predictions without being explicitly programmed for a given task 
[9]. As a result, faculty can devote more attention to such underperforming students to 
prepare them for summative assessments on time. This effort usually  leads to early 
detection of at -risk students, enhanced academic achievement, identification of weak 
learners, and trimming down of failure rates [10]. 
Various researchers conducted studies on this domain, but it mainly focused on using 
a single model pred iction [11] or most commonly known as classification algorithms 
such as Decision Tree C4.5, Random Forest, Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Na-
ive Bayes [12]. This study aim ed to provide a machine learning framework to predict 
students’ performance using a hybrid of classification and ensemble methods. The en-
semble method uses multiple classification algorithms strategically generated and inte-
grated to get a better prediction performance than the performance obtained from a 
single algorithm [13 -14]. It combines the best-selected techniques as the final predic-
tion model [15]. Furthermore, it combines different machine learning techniques into a 
single predictive model to reduce variability (bagging), bias (boosting), or improve re-
sults (stacking) [61]. The ex perimental results of various studies show that ensemble 
methods gained a higher accuracy performance when compared to a single classifica-
tion model [15-17]. Moreover, the study utilized wrapper-based and filter-based feature 
selection techniques to identi fy the best features of the dataset used to build the final 
predictive model. The main objective of the ML framework is to compare the prediction 
models made implemented using both classification and ensemble methods, then 
choose the best one with the highest predictive accuracy. 
As a result of these considerations, the current study posed the following research 
questions: 
1. Do feature selection techniques improve the accuracy of the predictive model?  
2. What is the best machine learning classification algorithm  to predict students' per-
formance in VLEs? 
3. Does the use of ensemble methods help the predictive models to achieve better per-
formance? 
The remainder of this paper is divided into four (4) sections —Section 2 presents 
background and related works. Section 3 presents the methodology, data collection pro-
cess, description, dataset generation, and model evaluation. Finally, section 4 discusses 
the obtained results, and Section 5 covers the conclusions and planned future works . 
2 Background and related works 
Machine learning (ML) for education is a new field in which a predictive model is 
created based on training data to predict students' performance [18]. The main goal is 
256
http://www.i-jet.org

===== 3581789.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 34
91
Review of Clustering Methods for Functional Data
MIMI ZHANG,Trinity College Dublin
ANDREW PARNELL,Maynooth University
Functional data clustering is to identify heterogeneous morphological patterns in the continuous functions
underlying the discrete measurements/observations. Application of functional data clustering has appeared
in many publications across various fields of sciences, including but not limited to biology, (bio)chemistry,
engineering,environmentalscience,medicalscience,psychology,socialscience,andsoon.Thephenomenal
growth of the application of functional data clustering indicates the urgent need for a systematic approach
to develop efficient clustering methods and scalable algorithmic implementations. On the other hand, there
is abundant literature on the cluster analysis of time series, trajectory data, spatio-temporal data, and so
on, which are all related to functional data. Therefore, an overarching structure of existing functional data
clusteringmethodswillenablethecross-pollinationofideasacrossvariousresearchfields.Wehereconducta
comprehensivereviewoforiginalclusteringmethodsforfunctionaldata.Weproposeasystematictaxonomy
that explores the connections and differences among the existing functional data clustering methods and
relates them to the conventional multivariate clustering methods. The structure of the taxonomy is built
on three main attributes of a functional data clustering method and therefore is more reliable than existing
categorizations. The review aims to bridge the gap between the functional data analysis community and the
clustering community and to generate new principles for functional data clustering.
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies→Cluster analysis;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Curve registration, dependent functional data, multivariate functional
data, shape analysis
ACM Reference format:
MimiZhangandAndrewParnell.2023.ReviewofClusteringMethodsforFunctionalData. ACMTrans.Knowl.
Discov. Data.17, 7, Article 91 (April 2023), 34 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3581789
1 INTRODUCTION
With the advancement of data-collection technology, a wide range of industry and business sec-
torsarenowabletocollectfunctionaldata.AccordingtoRamsayandSilverman[ 87],afunctional
datum is not an individual value but rather a set of measurements/observations along a contin-
uum that, taken together, are to be regarded as a single entity. Functional data come in many
forms, but their defining quality is that they consist of functions—often, but not always, curves.
For example, spectroscopic techniques obtain spectral information by probing each sample with
This publication has emanated from research supported by a research grant from Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) under
grant number 16/RC/3872 and is co-funded under the European Regional Development Fund.
Authors’ addresses: M. Zhang, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; email: mimi.zhang@tcd.ie; A. Parnell, Maynooth
University, Dublin, Ireland; email: andrew.parnell@mu.ie.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,
contact the owner/author(s).
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
1556-4681/2023/04-ART91 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3581789
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 17, No. 7, Article 91. Publication date: April 2023.
91:2 M. Zhang and A. Parnell
Fig. 1. Functional data clustering methods can be categorized into two major groups, according to whether
the clustering method is applied to the extracted tabular data (steps 1, 2, and 3) or to the estimated smooth
functions(step1andstep2*).Intheupperlineapproach,clusteranalysisisperformedinafinite-dimensional
space, while in the bottom line approach, cluster analysis is performed in an infinite-dimensional space.
electromagnetic radiation that varies in a range of wavelengths, and hence the calculated absorp-
tion coefficient is a function of wavelength. By probing a sample at different wavelengths, the set
of absorption coefficients is one data unit. Another example of functional data is an fMRI time
series, consisting of a time series of 3D images of the living human brain, where each 3D image
consistsofalargenumberofvoxels(3Dpixels).Forexample,theprevalentBOLDfMRIdetectsthe
blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal that reflects changes in deoxyhemoglobin, driven by local-
ized changes in brain blood flow and blood oxygenation. Each 3D image is a functional datum (or,
equivalently, a random field). Paradigmatic formats of functional data include time series, trajec-
tories, spatio-temporal data, and so on. However, the term “functional” is not the defining quality
oftimeseries,trajectories,orspatio-temporaldata.Ansarietal.[ 5]classifiedspatio-temporaldata
into five types, according to which certain types of spatio-temporal data are not functional data.
Apartfromthedifferenceinthedefinitionsofdataformat,themaindifferenceisinthefocusofsta-
tistical analysis: the focus of functional data analysis is on analyzing relations among the random
elements, rather than properties of individual random elements.
Whilefunctionaldataanalysishasreceivedattentionfromstatisticianssincethe1980s,thereis
verylittleadvancementintheareaoffunctionaldataclustering.Withinthetwodatabases:Scopus
andWebofScience,wefoundonlyabout100articlesthatareondevelopingclusteringmethodsfor
functional data.1 Moreover, nearly all documented methods tackle only the functional-data part
oftheproblem,nottheclusteringpartoftheproblem.Forexample,manystudiesmainlyconcern
extracting a tabular-data proxy for functional data, ignoring the synergy between the feature-
learning (a.k.a., representation-learning) step and the clustering step. The main objective of our
reviewistodevelopanoverarchingstructureofexistingfunctionaldataclusteringmethods,which
highlights the similarities and differences among them and their connections with conventional
multivariate clustering methods. We point to a few good references that give excellent coverage
ofstate-of-the-artclusteringmethodsforrelevantdatatypes(i.e.,timeseries,trajectorydata,and
spatio-temporal data). We also suggest a new methodological framework that extricates the pri-
mary deficiency in the current tandem approach. The review will also help connect the machine
learning and computer science communities with the challenges and opportunities in analyzing
functional data.
Figure1depictsthetandemapproachadoptedinthecurrentpracticeoffunctionaldatacluster-
ing, and Figure2illustrates our taxonomy. Functional data clustering methods can be categorized
(Tier 1 categorization) according to whether the clustering method is applied to the extracted
tabular data (i.e., in a finite-dimensional spac

===== Academic_Performance_Prediction_Using_Machine_Learning_Approaches_A_Survey.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Academic Performance Prediction Using Machine Learning Approaches: A Survey
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 18
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES, VOL. 18, 2025 351
Academic Performance Prediction Using Machine
Learning Approaches: A Survey
Jialun Pan, Zhanzhan Zhao, and Dongkun Han
Abstract—Properly predicting students’academic performance
is crucial for elevating educational outcomes in various disciplines.
Through precise performance prediction, schools can quickly pin-
point students facing challenges and provide customized educa-
tional materials suited to their speciﬁc learning needs. The reliance
on teachers’ experience to predict students’ academic performance
has proven to be less accurate and efﬁcient than desired. Conse-
quently, the past decade has witnessed a marked surge in employing
machine learning and data mining techniques to forecast students’
performance. However, the academic community has yet to agree
on the most effective algorithm for predicting academic outcomes.
Nonetheless, conducting an analysis and comparison of the ex-
isting algorithms in this ﬁeld remains meaningful. Furthermore,
recommendations for selecting an appropriate algorithm will be
provided to interested researchers and educators based on their
speciﬁc requirements. This article reviews the state-of-the-art liter-
ature on academic performance predictions using machine learning
approaches in recent years. It details the variables analyzed, the
algorithms implemented, the datasets utilized, and the evaluation
metrics applied to assess model efﬁcacy. What makes this work
different is that relevant surveys in the past 10 years are also an-
alyzed and compared, highlighting their contributions and review
methods. In addition, we compared the accuracy of various ma-
chine learning models using popular open-access datasets and de-
termined the best-performing algorithms among them. Our dataset
and source codes are released for future algorithm comparisons and
evaluations in this community.
Index Terms—Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in education, learning
analytics, machine learning, neural networks (NNs), performance
prediction, students’ performance, supervised learning, survey.
ABBREVIA TION
AUC Area under the curve.
CUD Chinese University dataset.
DT Decision tree.
EDM Educational data mining.
FN False negative.
FP False positive.
Received 2 March 2024; revised 15 July 2024, 5 November 2024, 2 February
2025, and 10 March 2025; accepted 13 March 2025. Date of publication 24
March 2025; date of current version 18 April 2025. This work was supported
by the Hong Kong Teaching Development and Language Enhancement Grant
under Grant TDLEG-4170989. (Corresponding author: Dongkun Han.)
Jialun Pan and Dongkun Han are with the Department of Mechanical and
Automation Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-
mail: allen06@link.cuhk.edu.hk; dkhan@mae.cuhk.edu.hk).
Zhanzhan Zhao is with the School of Humanities and Social Science,
Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China (e-mail:
zhanzhanzhao@cuhk.edu.cn).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2025.3554174, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TLT.2025.3554174
GBT Gradient boosted tree.
KNN K-nearest neighbor.
LR Logistic regression.
MAE Mean absolute error.
MLR Multiclass logistic regression.
MSE Mean squared error.
NB Naive Bayes.
NN Neural network.
OULAD Open University learning analytics dataset.
PRISMA Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and
metaanalyses.
RF Random forest.
RMSE Root mean squared error.
ROC Receiver operating characteristics.
SVM Support vector machine.
SVM-L Support vector machine—linear.
SVM-P Support vector machine—polynomial.
SVM-R Support vector machine—RBF.
SVM-S Support vector machine—sigmoid.
TN True negative.
TP True positive.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A
CADEMIC performance encompasses a student’s learn-
ing activities. It is reﬂected in a variety of assessment meth-
ods, including homework, quizzes, examinations, and projects
throughout the academic term [1]. Timely insights into students’
academic abilities enable teachers to adjust their instructional
plans dynamically and help prevent dropouts, which can affect
career prospects, strain public resources, and remain a signif-
icant concern, especially with high dropout rates on online
platforms [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8].
Traditionally, teachers assess the risk of academic failure
in their students based on previous performance in home-
work and exams. However, limited knowledge about students’
backgrounds makes teachers rely mainly on past records for
performance predictions.
Recently, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)-driven education has pro-
gressed rapidly, with EDM leveraging data analysis to gain
insights into learning processes [9], [10], [11]. By utilizing
these techniques, universities can improve student performance
predictions and track academic progress more effectively [12],
[13]. Studies show that various forecasting methods beneﬁt both
educators and administrators: educators can identify struggling
students early and adjust their instructional strategies, while
© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
352 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES, VOL. 18, 2025
administrators can enhance resource allocation and program
planning based on these insights [14]. These techniques also
extend to online education, fostering AI integration in virtual
learning and higher education [15].
The purpose of this survey is to examine recent research to ad-
dress four speciﬁc research questions. These research questions
will be thoroughly discussed in Section III-A.
1) What are the popular machine learning approaches used
in recent years?
2) What are the factors used in predicting students’ perfor-
mance?
3) What are the datasets used to train the prediction model,
and if they are open access?
4) What is the evaluation metric used when assessing the
performance of the prediction model?
The authors focus particularly on the algorithms used, key
factors, widely used datasets, evaluation methods, and their
application scenarios. The ﬁndings are subsequently validated
through simulations in Section V using the most widely rec-
ognized dataset in this ﬁeld. In addition, all the algorithms
and datasets used in the simulation are openly accessible. Note
that this study does not solely focus on EDM. For readers
interested in learning analytics and AI in education, this study
provides a clear guide for selecting appropriate datasets and the
most effective algorithms. Furthermore, the authors contribute a
high-quality dataset from the Chinese University of Hong Kong
to the ﬁeld of research.
In the subsequent paragraphs, we provide a comprehensive
summary of the practical applications of EDM based on aca-
demic performance prediction and outline the structure of our
survey. Section I-A discusses a quintessential EMD application
of the early 

===== applsci-12-10560-v2.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Learning Analytics to Determine Profile Dimensions of Students Associated with Their Academic Performance
AUTHOR_META: Andres Gonzalez-Nucamendi, Julieta Noguez, Luis Neri, Víctor Robledo-Rella, Rosa María Guadalupe García-Castelán and David Escobar-Castillejos
PAGES: 22
Citation: González-Nucamendi, A.;
Noguez, J.; Neri, L.; Robledo-Rella, V .;
García-Castelán, R.M.G.;
Escobar-Castillejos, D. Learning
Analytics to Determine Proﬁle
Dimensions of Students Associated
with Their Academic Performance.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 12, 10560. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app122010560
Academic Editors: Juan A.
Gómez-Pulido, Young Park, Ricardo
Soto and José M. Lanza-Gutiérrez
Received: 14 September 2022
Accepted: 10 October 2022
Published: 19 October 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Article
Learning Analytics to Determine Proﬁle Dimensions of
Students Associated with Their Academic Performance
Andres Gonzalez-Nucamendi 1
 , Julieta Noguez 1,*
 , Luis Neri 1
 , Víctor Robledo-Rella 1
 ,
Rosa María Guadalupe García-Castelán 1
 and David Escobar-Castillejos 2
1 Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Science, Ave. Eugenio Garza Sada 2501,
Monterrey 64849, Mexico
2 Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad Panamericana, Augusto Rodin 498, Mexico City 03920, Mexico
* Correspondence: jnoguez@tec.mx
Abstract: With the recent advancements of learning analytics techniques, it is possible to build
predictive models of student academic performance at an early stage of a course, using student’s self-
regulation learning and affective strategies (SRLAS), and their multiple intelligences (MI). This process
can be conducted to determine the most important factors that lead to good academic performance.
A quasi-experimental study on 618 undergraduate students was performed to determine student
proﬁles based on these two constructs: MI and SRLAS. After calibrating the students’ proﬁles,
learning analytics techniques were used to study the relationships among the dimensions deﬁned by
these constructs and student academic performance using principal component analysis, clustering
patterns, and regression and correlation analyses. The results indicate that the logical-mathematical
intelligence, intrinsic motivation, and self-regulation have a positive impact on academic performance.
In contrast, anxiety and dependence on external motivation have a negative effect on academic
performance. A priori knowledge of the characteristics of a student sample and its likely behavior
predicted by the models may provide both students and teachers with an early-awareness alert that
can help the teachers in designing enhanced proactive and strategic decisions aimed to improve
academic performance and reduce dropout rates. From the student side, knowledge about their main
academic proﬁle will sharpen their metacognition, which may improve their academic performance.
Keywords: educational innovation; higher education; academic performance; multiple intelligence;
self-regulation skills; affective strategies
1. Introduction
Learning analytics, understood as the use of data about students to improve their
learning, is an approach through which teachers can understand education, help them to
be student conscious and better capitalize teaching resources [1]. In particular, the search
to provide adaptive learning environments that offer students with alternative learning
options, such as various types of resources, interactive activities, and personalized services,
begins with the challenge of knowing their academic backgrounds, needs, and proﬁles.
Throughout history, educational institutions have been concerned about improving the
skills and learning outcomes of students to provide society with well-prepared profession-
als, who are ready to work out solutions and enroll in the labor market. However, one
of the main issues has been the determination of the key factors that inﬂuence academic
performance in a given learning environment. In this context, education has beneﬁted
recently from powerful data analysis tools, such as data mining and learning analytics [2,3].
Educational data mining, such as learning analytics, may guide educational institu-
tions in providing suitable learning environments that promote academic success [ 4–6].
Therefore, institutions have started using learning analytics tools to improve services and
student outcomes and promote life-long learning [ 7,8]. Learning analytics denotes the
Appl. Sci. 2021, 12, 10560. https://doi.org/10.3390/app122010560 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2021, 12, 10560 2 of 22
collection and analysis of data about learners and their instructional and learning contexts
to improve learning and learning environments. Therefore, learning analytics is near the
top of the priority list for many institutions in higher education. Furthermore, new and
evolving technologies are creating more and greater opportunities for the personalization of
education. However, poor academic performance and decline in student retention in higher
education continue to drive the need for more personalized, engaging student experiences
to maintain enrollment. Therefore, current technologies are reaching into the education
ecosystem and creating opportunities to bring the personalization of education to real
environments [9]. This can beneﬁt: (i) students in their learning process along with the
outcomes, (ii) designers of speciﬁc programs and courses focused on personalizing learning,
(iii) instructors in their performance, and (iv) researchers. All of them can apply Learning
Analytics more effectively to improve teaching as well as learning in higher education [10].
The beneﬁts of learning analytics typically take one of three forms: (a) early alert
warning or reminder systems, so that teachers or institutions can intervene with academic
support for students, (b) predictive analytics platforms, so that institutions can monitor
students regarding the evolution of their learning, and (c) course planning and navigation
systems to support course designers by providing relevant data-driven insights. Frequently,
these systems obtain data from the scholar services systems of institutions to identify,
for example, students at risk of failing courses or dropping out, student behavior patterns,
or points of failure within the system [ 11,12]. However, for learning environments that
are only partially digitized, teachers are required to use their pedagogy and transmission
of knowledge to enable students to acquire knowledge and develop their skills. This
conjunction is transformed by the connection of speciﬁc characteristics between teachers
and students. This meeting point helps in the discovery of how teachers and their teaching
methods inﬂuence the manner in which students feel, think, and act. This aspect is one that
is not always intentionally planned during the teaching process [13].
In previo

===== Artificial-Intelligence-Technology-and-Ideological.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 21
International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 19 • Issue 1 • January-December 2025
DOI: 10.4018/IJCINI.385726
1
This article published as an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creative-
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and production in any medium, provided the author of the 
original work and original publication source are properly credited.
Artificial Intelligence Technology and 
Ideological Political Education:
Navigating Employment Challenges and 
Opportunities for College Graduates
Yanjia Yang
 https:// orcid .org/ 0009 -0003 -4644 -060X
Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, China
Qiong Li
 https:// orcid .org/ 0009 -0004 -7734 -9048
Guizhou Medical University, China
ABSTRACT
This article focuses on the impact of artificial intelligence (AI) on college graduate employment. 
By collecting and analyzing student employment data, this study examined how artificial intelligence 
affected college students’ job prospects—based on this data, the article offers effective strategies 
regarding employment guidance. The research methodology included data collection regarding 
students’ academic performance, family economic situations, and employment preferences. The 
research study utilized the application of educational data mining techniques and machine learning 
algorithms, such as clustering and logistic regression. Results of this study showed that AI replaced 
certain types of jobs and created other, new employment opportunities for college graduates—and 
that students exhibited significant variations in their employment preferences (e.g., in terms of 
preferred job locations, industries, and roles) and academic performance, which in turn influenced 
their employment outcomes.college students in adjusting to the employment landscape as it has been 
shaped by AI.
KEYWORDS 
Artificial Intelligence, Employment, College Graduates, V ocational Education, Career Guidance, Job Market, 
Productivity, Job Polarization, AI Integration, Ideological and Political Education
INTRODUCTION
The advent of artificial intelligence (AI) has effected rapid change across multiple areas of 
human life, especially over the last decade (Wang, 2020). AI is now integrated into daily life, exerting 
an increasingly pervasive influence (Piyavsky et al., 2020). Notably, AI has played a pivotal role 
in supplanting human labor, particularly in advanced technological sectors (Kindrat, 2021). As AI 
has continued to develop at a fast pace, many individuals have become disadvantaged in the area of 
employment (Duan, 2020). Indeed, AI technologies now profoundly affect every facet of society (Liu, 
2024). The goal of this study was to investigate the multifaceted impact of AI on college graduate 
employment, considering both its benefits and challenges. By analyzing characteristics relevant to 
students such as their academic performance, family economic conditions, and regional familiarity, 
2
International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 19 • Issue 1 • January-December 2025
the aim was to establish an empirically-based employment guidance model to provide personalized, 
effective employment guidance for college students in the context of AI’s continual development, 
thereby helping them better cope with employment-related challenges and opportunities introduced 
by AI.
For most college graduates, the primary challenge upon leaving academia is securing employment 
(Akula et al., 2019). This transition brings both positive and negative implications for their experience 
of the job market (Ohrimenko & Voronina, 2021). To facilitate student success, institutions have an 
obligation to provide effective guidance regarding the impact of intelligent technologies on student 
employability (Cerrito & Behun, 2020).
Recent years have seen many studies investigating the effects of AI on employment. For example, 
Li et al. (2023) explored the long-term impact of AI on the labor market structure, using large-scale 
panel data. Their research showed that AI not only changed the demand for different types of skills, 
but also led to significant shifts in industry employment distribution. Chen et al. (2024) focused on 
the impact of AI on the cognitive skills required for employment and found that AI-enabled jobs often 
demanded higher-order cognitive skills, such as critical thinking and problem-solving. Additionally, 
Wang and Zhang (2023) studied the role of AI in promoting inclusive employment and found that 
AI potentially broke down barriers in the job market for certain disadvantaged groups.
Currently, academic discourse on the impact of AI on employment has primarily revolved around 
two perspectives: the negative and the positive effects. The negative effects have been divided into 
two categories. The first has involved the replacement of labor by automation (Martin et al.,2022). 
A 2017 forecast by McKinsey and Company projected that up to 800 million jobs globally could 
be displaced by automated systems by 2030 (Zhang et al., 2021). The report noted that varying 
degrees of impact would be felt across different countries and occupations, due to disparities in the 
development capabilities of AI systems (Malham & Munday, 2022). The second aspect was the 
phenomenon of technological unemployment, where highly advanced technologies have diminished 
the demand for low-skilled and simplistic labor (Packel et al., 2021). As traditional industries have 
become increasingly mechanized, the incidence of global unemployment has escalated, increasing 
the unemployment rate (Freeman et al., 2021). This displacement of human labor by AI, however, 
has been conditional (Goncharenko & Semenkova, 2021).
The positive effects have manifested primarily as compensation within the labor market. These 
advancements have reshaped the working environment, offering higher-skilled, higher-quality, and 
better-compensated job opportunities (Zaslavskaya & Zaslavskiy, 2020).
At its core, the issue of AI-driven labor replacement has been seen as fundamentally an 
employment challenge. Scholarly research has focused on two main strategies. The first has been 
enhancing vocational education and employment training to ensure robust reemployment support 
systems for college graduates (Kamburugamuwa et al., 2020). Second, studies have continually 
adapted different pathways and models to maintain accurate career guidance for young graduates. 
In this way, educational institutions have been able to leverage AI technology to build innovative 
teaching platforms and integrate AI into their curricula (Sassi & Islam, 2020), fostering a deeper 
understanding of AI technologies and their implications for the job market among students.There 
has been widespread societal anxiety regarding machine-induced labor displacement (Kim & Heo, 
2022; Mir et al., 2023), however, AI ha

===== Behavioral_Data-Driven_Learning_Analytics_for_Early_Intervention_in_At-Risk_Students.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Behavioral Data-Driven Learning Analytics for Early Intervention in At-Risk Students
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 6
XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 
Behavioral Data-Driven Learning Analytics for 
Early Intervention in At-Risk Students  
 
Tresa Maria Josylin  
Department Of Computer Science 
& Engineering 
BMS Institute of Technology and 
Management 
Bengaluru,Karnataka,India 
tresamjosylin@bmsit.in 
 
 Ganeshayya Shidaganti  
Department Of Computer Science & 
Engineering 
M S Ramaiah Institute Of Technology 
Bengaluru,Karnataka,India 
ganeshayyashidaganti@msrit.edu   
Abstract — Timely identification of at-risk students is essen tial for 
improving academic outcomes and supporting personal ized 
interventions. With the increasing adoption of digi tal learning 
environments, vast amounts of behavioral data are g enerated 
through student interactions with educational platf orms. 
Analyzing these behavioral patterns presents a prom ising 
opportunity to proactively identify students who ma y require 
additional academic support. The study introduces a  
comprehensive learning analytics framework that ana lyzes 
behavioral engagement data to uncover meaningful pa tterns and 
predict academic risk. By identifying distinct beha vioral personas 
through clustering of engagement patterns, we uncov er how 
varying interaction styles relate to academic perfo rmance. 
Predictive models such as XGBoost and Random Forest  are then 
used to detect at-risk students, with the latter ac hieving 97% 
accuracy and an AUC of 0.99. SHAP-based interpretab ility 
further reveals key behavioral drivers of risk. Dim ensionality 
reduction techniques like SVD highlight latent patt erns in student 
behavior. The approach offers a holistic, explainab le, and data-
driven method to support early identification and i ntervention for 
at-risk learners. 
Keywords— Behavioral Clustering, Educational Data Mi ning, 
Explainable AI, Learning Analytics,Risk Prediction. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
       The expedited incorporation of digital techn ologies within 
the educational sphere has significantly altered co nventional 
learning paradigms, facilitating student interactio n with 
academic content via diverse online conduits. This 
transformation has given rise to the real-time docu mentation of 
substantial behavioral data, encompassing elements such as 
participation in discussions, the frequency of reso urce 
utilization, and the nature of classroom interactio ns. The 
judicious exploitation of this information presents  a substantial 
opportunity to enhance educational outcomes, bolste r 
personalized support mechanisms, and preemptively d iscern 
pupils who may be susceptible to academic underachi evement. 
Nevertheless, the early identification of disengage ment patterns 
and their insightful interpretation poses a signifi cant challenge 
for educational professionals and institutions. Alt hough 
academic performance metrics serve to provide concl usive 
outcomes, they frequently fall short in encapsulati ng the 
comprehensive behavioral trajectories that underpin  
achievement or failure. This underscores the impera tive for 
methodologies grounded in data analysis that can 
systematically scrutinize student behavior, elucida te coherent 
patterns or archetypes, and yield predictive insigh ts concerning 
academic performance.In this respect, Learning Anal ytics (LA) 
emerges as a highly efficacious discipline that syn thesizes 
educational data with advanced statistical and mach ine learning 
methodologies to underpin astute pedagogical decisi on-making. 
By employing Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA), educa tors are 
equipped to garner the interrelations between speci fic 
behavioral indicators, such as participatory gestur es, 
attentiveness to notifications, and engagement with  learning 
materials, and their consequential impact on schola stic results. 
Unsupervised learning techniques, exemplified by cl ustering 
methodologies, assist in categorizing students in a ccordance 
with their respective engagement levels, thus allow ing for the 
tailored implementation of educational strategies. Furthermore, 
the use of transparent and interpretable machine le arning 
models contributes significantly to the anticipatio n of students 
at risk of suboptimal performance, thereby fosterin g a more 
proactive and personalized approach to academic sup port and 
intervention. This study proposes an integrated lea rning 
analytics framework that: 
•  Analyzes student behavioral data using exploratory 
data analysis; 
•  Identifies behavioral personas through clustering; 
•  Utilizes predictive models  to detect at-risk students, 
with SHAP values for explainability; 
•  Visualizes latent behavioral patterns using 
dimensionality reduction techniques like SVD. 
   By combining behavioral segmentation and predict ive 
modeling, this work contributes toward creating a p roactive and 
explainable educational intervention system — enable s 
educators to make proactive, data-informed decisions. 
II.  LITERATURE  SURVEY 
       Predicting student performance and identifyi ng at-risk 
learners has become a vital focus and multiple stud ies have 
explored the use of artificial intelligence and mac hine learning 
to address this challenge using academic, behaviora l, and 
demographic data. Martínez and Castillo [1] investi gated 
student dropout prediction in higher education usin g AI 
algorithms on academic grades and demographic data spanning 
from 2012 to 2023 and achieved an accuracy of 95.4%  using 
Gradient Boosted Tree (GBT) algorithm for early ris k 
identification. In a similar vein, Sulak and Koklu [2] utilized 
Decision Trees, Random Forest, and Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANN) to classify students into "Dropout," "Enrolle d," and 
"Graduate" categories using 4,424 records and 37 fe atures. 
ANN achieved the best performance with an accuracy of 
77.3%, followed by Random Forest at 75.5% and Decis ion 
Trees at 70.1%. Several studies have centered aroun d Random 
Forest (RF) and XGBoost due to their robustness in handling 
educational datasets. Mukesh Kumar et al. [3]evalua ted 
2025 9th International Conference on Computational System and Information Technology for Sustainable Solutions (CSITSS) | 979-8-3315-8894-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CSITSS67709.2025.11294003
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajamangala Univ of Technology Thanyaburi provided by UniNet. Downloaded on July 26,2026 at 09:52:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
multiple models and found RF and XGBoost achieved t he 
highest accuracies—95.05% (RF) and 84.38% (XGBoost) on 
test data—indicating their effectiveness over logist ic 
regression, Naive Bayes, SVM, and KNN. Nadar[4] pro posed a 
Modified XGBoost (MXGB) approach leveraging stream- based 
data with cross-validation and feature engineering.  The MXGB 
model outperformed standard XGBoost in accuracy, pr ecision, 
sensitivity, and F1-score, proving beneficial for r eal-time 
student performance prediction. Chen and Zhai [5] a lso utilized 
XGBoost in a tiered instructio

===== Brit J Educational Tech - 2023 - Liu - Understanding privacy and data protection issues in learning analytics using a.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Understanding privacy and data protection issues in learning analytics using a systematic review
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 33
Br J Educ Technol. 2023;54:1715–1747.    | 1715
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/bjet
Received: 21 March 2023  | Accepted: 24 August 2023
DOI: 10.1111/bjet.13388  
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Understanding privacy and data protection 
issues in learning analytics using a systematic 
review
Qinyi Liu  |   Mohammad Khalil
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial  License, which permits 
use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial 
purposes.
© 2023 The Authors. British Journal of Educational Technology  published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British 
Educational Research Association.
Centre for the Science of Learning & 
Technology (SLATE), University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway
Correspondence
Qinyi Liu, Centre for the Science of 
Learning & Technology (SLATE), University 
of Bergen, Christiesgate 12, Bergen 5020, 
Norway.
Email: qinyi.liu@uib.no
The field of learning analytics has advanced from in -
fancy stages into a more practical domain, where tan-
gible solutions are being implemented. Nevertheless, 
the field has encountered numerous privacy and data 
protection issues that have garnered significant and 
growing attention. In this systematic review, four da -
tabases were searched concerning privacy and data 
protection issues of learning analytics. A final corpus 
of 47 papers published in top educational technol -
ogy journals was selected after running an eligibility 
check. An analysis of the final corpus was carried out 
to answer the following three research questions: (1) 
What are the privacy and data protection issues in 
learning analytics? (2) What are the similarities and 
differences between the views of stakeholders from 
different backgrounds on privacy and data protection 
issues in learning analytics? (3) How have previous 
approaches attempted to address privacy and data 
protection issues? The results of the systematic re -
view show that there are eight distinct, intertwined 
privacy and data protection issues that cut across 
the learning analytics cycle. There are both cross- 
regional similarities and three sets of differences in 
stakeholder perceptions towards privacy and data 
protection in learning analytics. With regard to previ -
ous attempts to approach privacy and data protection 
issues in learning analytics, there is a notable dearth 
of applied evidence, which impedes the assessment 
of their effectiveness. The findings of our paper sug -
gest that privacy and data protection issues should 

1716 |   
LIU and KHALIL
INTRODUCTION
Since learning analytics (LA) was given a more general definition at the Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge Conference in 2011—  that is, ‘understanding and optimising the learning environ-
ment, and measuring and analysing learner-  related data (Long & Siemens, 2011)—  various 
aspects of LA have been studied in depth. The issue of privacy and data protection has 
come to the forefront of LA challenges. Early research emphasised that data used in LA 
not be relaxed at any point in the implementation of 
learning analytics, as these issues persist throughout 
the learning analytics development cycle. One key 
implication of this review suggests that solutions to 
privacy and data protection issues in learning analyt-
ics should be more evidence- based, thereby increas-
ing the trustworthiness of learning analytics and its 
usefulness.
KEYWORDS
data protection, learning analytics, privacy, systematic review, 
trustworthy
Practitioner notes
What is already known about this topic
• Research on privacy and data protection in learning analytics has become a rec -
ognised challenge that hinders the further expansion of learning analytics.
• Proposals to counter the privacy and data protection issues in learning analytics 
are blurry; there is a lack of a summary of previously proposed solutions.
What this study contributes
• Establishment of what privacy and data protection issues exist at different phases 
of the learning analytics cycle.
• Identification of how different stakeholders view privacy, similarities and differences, 
and what factors influence their views.
• Evaluation and comparison of previously proposed solutions that attempt to 
address privacy and data protection in learning analytics.
Implications for practice and/or policy
• Privacy and data protection issues need to be viewed in the context of the entire 
cycle of learning analytics.
• Stakeholder views on privacy and data protection in learning analytics have 
commonalities across contexts and differences that can arise within the same 
context. Before implementing learning analytics, targeted research should be 
conducted with stakeholders.
• Solutions that attempt to address privacy and data protection issues in learning 
analytics should be put into practice as far as possible to better test their usefulness.
 14678535, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://bera-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bjet.13388 by SEA ORCHID (Thailand), Wiley Online Library on [09/08/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


===== Clustering_Student_Performance_Data_using_K-Means_in_Educational_Data_Mining.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Clustering Student Performance Data using K-Means in Educational Data Mining
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 6
 
 
Clustering Student Performance Data using K-
Means in Educational Data Mining  
 
Pinaki Pratim Acharjya  
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Haldia Institute of Technology 
Haldia, West Bengal, India 
ppacharjya@gmail.com 
Mahuya Sasmal 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Haldia Institute of Technology 
Haldia, West Bengal, India 
mahuyaray2011@gmail.com 
Moumita Das 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Haldia Institute of Technology 
Haldia, West Bengal, India 
moumita.das23@gmail.com 
Sougata Sikdar 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Haldia Institute of Technology 
Haldia, West Bengal, India 
sougata.sikdar2015@gmail.com 
Rajrupa Metia 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Haldia Institute of Technology 
Haldia, West Bengal, India 
rajrupa.metia@gmail.com 
Sk Hojayfa Rahaman 
Dept. of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
Haldia Institute of Technology 
Haldia, West Bengal, India 
hojayfa25@gmail.com  
Abstract— Student performance analysis plays a 
crucial role in improving the quality of education by 
identifying learning patterns and challenges. This study 
applies the K -Means clustering algorithm to analyze 
student performance data and categorize learners into 
distinct groups based on their academic achievements. By 
utilizing semester results from undergraduate 
engineering students, the study identifies three primary 
clusters: below average, average, and above average. The 
clustering approach helps in understanding how students 
with different learning abilities progress over multiple 
semesters. Additionally, the research explores changes in 
learning behavior within these groups, providing insights 
into academic performance trends. The findings suggest 
that data -driven classification can assist educators in 
offering targeted support and personalized learning 
strategies. Future work can extend this study by 
incorporating larger datasets and a wider range of 
courses to enhance the accuracy and applicability of the 
clustering model in educational data mining. 
Keywords— student performance, clustering, educational data 
mining, K-Means algorithm 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In today’s digital age, data surrounds us everywhere, both 
in structured forms, such as numbers and text, and 
unstructured forms like images, videos, and social media 
posts. From the moment a child is born, information about 
them is meticulously collected starting with birth registration 
and continuing throughout their lifetime. Educational 
institutions track academic progress, government agencies 
monitor demographic information, and online platforms 
gather data about individuals' behaviors, preferences, an d 
interactions [1-2]. This constant data flow has created an era 
of information abundance. While this influx of data can feel 
overwhelming, it holds tremendous potential to drive positive 
change across various domains. By analyzing these vast 
datasets, we can uncover hidden patterns, correlations, and 
trends that may not be immediately apparent. These insights 
have the power to transform sectors such as healthcare, where 
they can improve diagnoses and treatment outcomes, or 
education, by enhancing learning strategies and identifying 
areas for intervention. The process of extracting these valuable 
insights from large and complex datasets is known as data 
mining [3-4]. Data mining involves using various techniques, 
such as clustering, classification, and regre ssion, to discover 
patterns that can lead to better decision-making and improved 
systems across different fields, ultimately paving the way for 
innovation and progress. 
The modern world is awash in data, both structured and 
unstructured. From the moment a child is born, information 
about them is meticulously recorded, starting with birth 
registration. This trend continues throughout their lives, with 
educational instituti ons, government agencies, and online 
platforms collecting vast amounts of data. This explosion of 
information, while seemingly overwhelming, holds immense 
potential [1 -2]. Hidden within these massive datasets are 
patterns and insights that can revolutioniz e how we 
understand and improve various systems, from healthcare to 
education. Extracting this valuable knowledge from large data 
stores is the core focus of data mining [3-4]. 
Educational institutions, like other organizations, generate 
substantial amounts of data. Student records, including family 
details, contact information, academic history, attendance 
records, and performance in various assessments, accumulate 
over time. This rich repository of information offers a unique 
opportunity to understand student learning behaviour and 
identify areas for improvement. Furthermore, the rise of 
online learning platforms, with their vast libraries of 
educational videos, software, and interactive tools, has added 
another layer of complexity and potential to educational data. 
This wealth of educational data can be analysed [6] to gain a 
deeper understanding of how students learn and how teaching 
methods can be optimized. 
Educational data mining (EDM) is the application of data 
mining techniques specifically to educational data. It aims to 
analyse student data from multiple perspectives, discover 
hidden patterns, and ultimately use this knowledge to enhance 
student learning and teaching practices [7]. The benefits of 
EDM extend to all stakeholders in the educational ecosystem. 
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC-2025)
IEEE Xplore Part Number: CFP25K25-ART; ISBN: 979-8-3315-1211-8
979-8-3315-1211-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE 544
2025 8th International Conference on Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC) | 979-8-3315-1211-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCMC65190.2025.11140631
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajamangala Univ of Technology Thanyaburi provided by UniNet. Downloaded on July 26,2026 at 09:47:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Students can gain personalized insights into their learning 
strengths and weaknesses. Teachers can tailor their instruction 
to meet the specific needs of their students. Course developers 
can create more effective learning materials. Colleges and 
universities can track student progress, identify at -risk 
students, and improve institutional effectiveness. 
Administrators can make data -driven decisions regarding 
resource allocation and curriculum development. 
In today's competitive job market, industries require 
skilled professionals with both theoretical knowledge and 
practical skills. Educational institutions play a crucial role in 
preparing students for successful careers. Enhancements and 
innovations in teaching are essential to ensure that all students, 
including those who learn at a slower pace, can achieve their 
full potential. A critical first step in this process is identifying 
groups of students with similar learning behaviour

===== Clustering_Students_Based_on_Learning_Styles_A_Machine_Learning_Approach_for_Personalized_Education.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Clustering Students Based on Learning Styles: A Machine Learning Approach for Personalized Education
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 7
979-8-3315-3925-2/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE 
Clustering Students Based on Learning Styles:  
A Machine Learning Approach for Personalized 
Education 
 
Somya Jaiswal¹ 
School of CSIT 
 Symbiosis University of Applied Sciences,  
Indore, India 
2022btcs052@suas.student.ac.in 
 
            Jiya Darvai² 
Dept. Of AI and DS 
Prestige Institute of Engineering 
Management and Research 
Indore, India 
darvaijiya@gmail.com 
 
Dr. Neha Gupta4 
School of CSIT 
Symbiosis University of Applied Sciences, 
Indore, India 
Drnehagupta.indore@gmail.com 
       Mr. Lokesh Sahu³ 
         School of CSIT 
Symbiosis University of Applied Sciences  
Indore, India 
lokesh.sahu@suas.ac.in 
 
 
  
 
Abstract— This study discusses the use of machine learning methods 
for clustering students according to their learning styles and 
behavioral characteristics. Employing a wide-ranging dataset of 
academic and personal measures, we used K-Means clustering to 
determine different student groups and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) 
for predicting cluster membership for prospective students. The 
research process involved data preprocessing, exploratory data 
analysis, feature engineering, and model building. We identified three 
clusters with varying attributes: Cluster 1 (high-attendance and low-
stress disciplined learners), Cluster 2 (moderate-attendance digital-
oriented learners with increased stress), and Cluster 3 (disengaged 
learners with low attendance and low assignment completion). We 
created an interactive Shiny application where institutions can 
explore student data, view clusters, and forecast learning styles for 
prospective students. This work contributes to Educational Data 
Mining (EDM) by combining behavioral variables with learning 
measures, making results actionable for targeted educational 
intervention. 
Index Terms—Learning preferences, Student grouping using K-Means 
clustering, Educational data mining, Student behavioral analysis, 
Personalized learning approaches, Academic performance prediction, 
Behavioral and academic data integration. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The education arena has seen a paradigm change from the 
conventional one-size-fits-all style of education to individualized 
learning experiences. Academic institutions are more and more 
identifying with the need to understand different styles of learning 
and learning behavior in order to improve academic performance 
and student welfare. This is at a time when educational information 
is more numerous and accessible than it has ever been, opening 
grounds for using machine learning methodologies to analyze 
learner trends in understanding more about learning. Traditional 
models of education frequently classify students only on academic 
merit, ignoring important behavioral and psychological variables 
that impact the learning process. Such a narrow approach does not      
meet the varied needs of students with varying learning styles, habits 
of study, and personal situations. As such, non-traditional 
learners may be inappropriately classified or not provided with 
services that would enable them to perform academically. The 
importance of this work is that it has the potential to offer a 
more integrated picture of student learning profiles by 
combining a broad range of academic and behavioral 
characteristics. Through the use of machine learning algorithms 
to cluster students on the basis of multidimensional data, we are 
able to detect patterns that otherwise are not apparent through 
standard assessment. These findings can be used to inform 
targeted interventions, student-specific teaching strategies, and 
anticipatory support systems that address the individual needs.  
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
 A. Overview of Educational Data Mining (EDM) 
  Educational Data Mining (EDM) has become an important 
field that overlaps with education, computer science, and 
statistics [1] describe EDM as "an emerging discipline, 
concerned with developing methods for exploring the 
unique types of data that come from educational settings, 
and using those methods to better understand students and 
the settings which they learn in." The discipline has picked 
up a lot of traction in the last ten years, with investigators 
employing more advanced data mining methods to 
educational data. A number of exhaustive reviews of EDM 
literature point out its development and usage [2] in their 
thorough survey of EDM research identified some 
prominent areas of application that are modeling students, 
predicting student performance, and identification of 
unwanted student behaviors. Their review pointed out the 
possibility of clustering methods being used in identifying 
homogeneous groups of students with respect to their 
interaction with learning systems. 
2025 World Skills Conference on Universal Data Analytics and Sciences (WorldSUAS) | 979-8-3315-3925-2/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WorldSUAS66815.2025.11198965
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajamangala Univ of Technology Thanyaburi provided by UniNet. Downloaded on July 26,2026 at 09:53:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 B. Machine Learning Applications in Education  
 Machine learning techniques have extensively been utilized in 
educational environments to solve different problem s. 
Supervised learning methods like decision trees, ne ural 
networks, and support vector machines have been uti lized to 
forecast student performance [3], whereas unsupervi sed 
methods like clustering algorithms have been used t o discover 
patterns in students' behavior and learning style. Clustering, 
specifically, has been useful to discern student cl usters with 
comparable characteristics. K-Means clustering, bei ng 
computationally effective and interpretable, has be en widely 
used by researchers [4], for example, used K-Means clustering 
on student interaction data in an e-learning enviro nment and 
discovered unique patterns of learning material engagement. 
 C. Learning Styles and Student Categorization 
  The idea of learning styles has been the focus of  protracted 
dispute in educational psychology. Although it has been 
criticized by some researchers on empirical grounds  as being 
scientifically unjustified [5], others believe in their instructional 
utility in guiding teaching design and student supp ort [6]. 
Different models of learning style categorizations have been 
proposed, including Kolb's Experiential Learning Th eory, 
Felder-Silverman Learning Style Model, and VARK (Vi sual, 
Auditory, Reading/Writing, Kinesthetic). These models usually 
classify students into categories based on their learning activity 
and information presentation preferences. Current r esearch has 
expanded beyond the conventional learning style cla ssification 
to include a wider number of factors impacting lear ning [7] 
suggested a multidimensional model synthesizing cog nitive, 
affective, and social aspects of learning, contending that a more 
holistic strategy for student cl

===== Early_Predicting_of_Students_Performance_in_Higher_Education.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Early Predicting of Students Performance in Higher Education
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 11
Received 5 February 2023, accepted 21 February 2023, date of publication 1 March 2023, date of current version 22 March 2023.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2023.3250702
Early Predicting of Students Performance in
Higher Education
ESSA ALHAZMI
 AND ABDULLAH SHENEAMER
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, Jazan University, Jazan 45142, Saudi Arabia
Corresponding author: Abdullah Sheneamer (asheneamer@jazanu.edu.sa)
This work was supported by Jazan University under Grant W41-055.
ABSTRACT Students learning performance is one of the core components for assessing any educational
systems. Students performance is very crucial in tackling issues of learning process and one of the important
matters to measure learning outcomes. The ability to use data knowledge to improve education systems
has led to the development of the field of research known as educational data mining (EDM). EDM is the
creation of techniques to investigate data gathered from educational settings, allowing for a more thorough
and accurate understanding of students and the improvement of educational outcomes for them. The use of
machine learning (ML) technology has increased significantly in recent years. Researchers and teachers can
use the measurements of success, failure, dropout, and more provided by the discipline of data mining in
education to predict and simulate education processes. Therefore, this work presents an analysis of students
performance using data mining methods. The paper presents both clustering and classification techniques to
identify the impact of students performance at early stage with on the GPA. For the clustering technique, the
paper uses dimensionality reduction mechanism by T-SNE algorithm with various factors at early stage such
as admission scores and first level courses, academic achievement tests (AA T) and general aptitude tests
(GA T) in order to explore the relationship between these factors and GPA ’s. For the classification technique,
the paper presents experiments on different machine learning models on predicting student performance at
early stages using different features including courses’ grades and admission tests’ scores. We use different
assessment metrics to evaluate the quality of the models. The results suggest that educational systems can
mitigate the risks of students failures at the early stages.
INDEX TERMS Graph mining, students’ performance prediction, student academic performance, early
prediction, data mining.
I. INTRODUCTION
Education is an important element and plays a significant role
in our society. Information and communication technology
has affected many fields of research, specifically in the edu-
cation field. For example, as we have seen in many countries
used various e-Learning environments [1] due to the recent
pandemic COVID19.
A higher education institution considers the academic per-
formance of students as one of the most important issues
regarding presenting quality education to its students [2], [3].
Understanding the significant factors in students perfor-
mance at early stage of their education is complex. V arious
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Yiqi Liu
.
effective tools have been used to overcome the students’
performance challenges in academia [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].
However, these tools may not be easy to generalized in all
circumstances of education. In the recent years, with the
advances of the application of technologies to forecasting
students’ performance, there are still gaps to be filled in
order to analysis and improve the accuracy of students per-
formance using new features and data mining methods and
present both clustering and classification techniques to iden-
tify the impact of students performance at early stage with on
the GPA.
The learning process includes a lot of student performance.
Identifying students who are more likely to have poor aca-
demic success in the future requires making predictions about
student performance. If the data has been transformed into
VOLUME 11, 2023
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 27579
E. Alhazmi, A. Sheneamer: Early Predicting of Students Performance in Higher Education
knowledge, it may be useful and used in predictions. As a
result, the information might improve the quality of education
and learning and help students in achieving their academic
objectives. Data mining techniques are used in the study
area known as educational data mining (EDM) to analyze
information derived from educational backgrounds [7]. EDM
implementation also aids in the planning of strategies for rais-
ing student performance. As a result, it will improve teaching
and learning and the students’ experience in the educational
institution.
Academic success is important because it is strongly linked
to the positive outcomes we value. One of the academic
success factors is the academic students performance in the
college or university. The cumulative academic achievement
for each student still indicates the success of every college
or university. Also, the other factors we can use in analysis
and predict the academic students performance are aptitude
test, GPA of secondary school and the name of the school
which the student graduated from. We believe that the per-
formance of the students in the first year in college can be
used as a factor to predict the performance of student in the
rest of years of his/her studies. These factors lead to early
remedy for students and take actions to improve student per-
formance Artificial intelligence techniques have been applied
on educational data to reveal the significant reasons behind
student performance. The contributions of the paper are as
follows:
• We propose a framework for predicting students per-
formance using student’s academic performance and
his/her social relationships features.
• We use admission scores, his/her first level courses
scores and academic achievement test (AA T) and gen-
eral aptitude test (GA T).
• We explore a new way of using admission, his/her first
level courses scores, and AA T and GA T by tSNE dimen-
sionality reduction. To the best of our knowledge this
attempt is a first of its kind to use features from both
admission scores and his/her first level courses scores
to early predict student’s performance using machine
learning.
• We also explore a new way of using increasing the
threshold of relocating which is to compute the absolute
difference between a grade and following grade after or
before.
• We use a state-of-the-art classification models to evalu-
ate the effectiveness of our proposed idea.
We organize the paper as follows: Section II provides the
literature related to students performance prediction tech-
niques used in the field of Education. Section III provides
details of the used 

===== Educational_Data_Mining_Clustering_Approach_Case_Study_of_Undergraduate_Student_Thesis_Topic.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Educational Data Mining Clustering Approach: Case Study of Undergraduate Student Thesis Topic
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 17
Received 27 September 2023, accepted 7 November 2023, date of publication 14 November 2023,
date of current version 27 November 2023.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2023.3332818
Educational Data Mining Clustering Approach:
Case Study of Undergraduate Student
Thesis Topic
ANDRE
1,2, NANIK SUCIATI
 1, (Member, IEEE), HADZIQ FABROYIR 1, (Member, IEEE),
AND ERIC PARDEDE
 3, (Senior Member, IEEE)
1Department of Informatics, Faculty of Intelligent Electrical and Informatics Technology, Institut Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember, Surabaya 60111, Indonesia
2Department of Informatics, Faculty of Engineering, Universitas Surabaya, Surabaya 60293, Indonesia
3Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia
Corresponding author: Nanik Suciati (nanik@if.its.ac.id)
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Research, and Technology, Indonesia, under grant of the Doctoral
Dissertation Research year 2022.
ABSTRACT This study aims to investigate the potential of educational data mining (EDM) in addressing the
issue of delayed completion in undergraduate student thesis courses. Delayed completion of these courses is
a common issue that affects both students and higher education institutions. This study employed clustering
analysis to create clusters of thesis topics. The research model was constructed using expert labeling to assign
each thesis title to a computer science ontology standard. Cross-referencing was employed to associate
supporting courses with each thesis title, resulting in a labeled dataset with three supporting courses for
each thesis title. This study analyzed five different clustering algorithms, including K-Means, DBScan,
BIRCH, Gaussian Mixture, and Mean Shift, to identify the best approach for analyzing undergraduate thesis
data. The results demonstrated that k-means clustering is the most efficient method, generating five distinct
clusters with unique characteristics. Furthermore, this study investigated the correlation between educational
data, specifically GPA, and the average grades of courses that support a thesis title and the duration of
thesis completion. Our investigation revealed a moderate correlation between GPA, thesis-supporting course
average grades, and the time to complete the thesis, with higher academic performance being associated with
shorter completion times. These moderate results indicate the need for further studies to explore additional
factors beyond GPA and the average grades of thesis-supporting courses that contribute to delays in thesis
completion. This study contributes to the understanding and evaluation of educational outcomes within study
programs, as defined in the curriculum, particularly concerning the design and implementation of thesis
topics. Additionally, the clustering results serve as a foundation for future research and offer valuable insights
into the potential of EDM techniques to assist in selecting appropriate thesis topics, thereby reducing the risk
of delayed completion.
INDEX TERMS Computing classification system, undergraduate thesis, clustering analysis, k-means,
ontology.
I. INTRODUCTION
Educational Data Mining (EDM) involves data mining,
machine learning, and statistical methodologies to extract
valuable insights from educational datasets [1]. These
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Zhigao Zheng.
datasets are often obtained from Learning Management
Systems (LMS) and include detailed information such as
assignment submission dates, LMS access logs, and social
interaction within the platform. Additionally, less detailed
data, such as student transcript historical data, which contain
information on courses attended and grades received, can
also be used in the EDM. By analyzing these datasets, the
130072

 2023 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ VOLUME 11, 2023
Andre et al.: EDM Clustering Approach: Case Study of Undergraduate Student Thesis Topic
EDM can identify trends, patterns, and relevant information
that may not be immediately apparent, allowing for a deeper
understanding of educational processes and outcomes.
In the field of education, EDM has become increasingly
important for both learners and educators. Recent research
has focused on applying advanced EDM techniques to ana-
lyze large datasets and extract meaningful patterns. EDM can
be used to predict students’ learning behavior [2], discover
hidden information through clustering approaches [3], [4],
[5], analyze the impact of learning methods, and advance
scientific understanding. This technique can be applied to
anomaly detection, association rule problems, clustering,
classification, regression, and summary problems.
The clustering technique is an unsupervised learning
method for obtaining information from a large dataset and
studying the relationships and patterns between data. In clus-
tering, data are grouped based on the proximity or similarity
of their attributes. Studies have found that clustering tech-
niques in education deliver benefits for the learner by
delivering better recommendations, such as adjusting learn-
ing styles, material selection, educator selection, and other
benefits to improve stakeholder performance [4], [5], [6].
The clustering technique is also applicable to EDM. Romero
and V entura’s taxonomy [7] provides insights for numerous
studies in this area. For example, the problems of determining
significant contributors that affect learner performance [8],
[9], the development of student learning profiles based on
learner behavior data [6], [10], [11], and the prediction of
miscellaneous academic outcomes (student dropout, learner
performance, and learner behavior) [12], [13], [14], [15].
Several methods and points of view identify and investigate
issues pertaining to the educational domain [16]. Universities
in Indonesia officially refer to the government regulation of
undergraduate thesis duration, which is a six-month time-
frame specified in the course syllabus. This type of course has
characteristics that differ from those of regular courses. The
learning process involves mentoring supervisors/advisors and
students, working on real-world topics, and requiring stu-
dents’ cognitive abilities. Students must tackle challenge
critically, creatively, and independently for their undergrad-
uate thesis to succeed. Nevertheless, a delay in completing
an undergraduate thesis is one of the issues where students,
on average, finish the thesis in more than six months or two
semesters.
In Educational Data Mining (EDM), researchers often
use clustering methods for various tasks such as classify-
ing courses, predicting student behavior, and creating course
recommendation systems. However, there remains a gap in
the application of EDM

===== Enhancing_the_Early_Student_Dropout_Prediction_Model_Through_Clustering_Analysis_of_Students_Digital_Traces.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Enhancing the Early Student Dropout Prediction Model Through Clustering Analysis of Students&#x2019; Digital Traces
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 32
Received 5 September 2024, accepted 30 September 2024, date of publication 28 October 2024, date of current version 7 November 2024.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2024.3486762
Enhancing the Early Student Dropout Prediction
Model Through Clustering Analysis of Students’
Digital Traces
JANKA PECUCHOVA
 AND MARTIN DRLIK
Department of Informatics, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Informatics, Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra, 949 01 Nitra, Slovakia
Corresponding author: Janka Pecuchova (jpecuchova@ukf.sk)
This work was supported in part by the Scientific Grant Agency of the Ministry of Education of Slovak Republic and Slovak Academy of
Sciences under Contract VEGA-1/0490/22, in part by European Commission ERASMUS+ Program 2021 under Grant
2021-1-SK01-KA220-HED-000032095; and in part by the European Union (EU) NextGenerationEU through the Recovery and Resilience
Plan for Slovakia under Project 09I03-03-V04-000596.
ABSTRACT Educational Data Mining and learning analytics have gained significant prominence in recent
years, garnering attention from researchers worldwide. This is primarily due to their potential to improve
decision-making processes within higher education. This study utilizes Educational Data Mining to suggest
a clustering-based approach for classifying students based on their academic performance, specifically
focusing on their interactions within Learning Management Systems in blended learning settings. Log data
from the Learning Management System Moodle platform was analyzed to determine if valuable insights
could be derived from student activities without the need for personal or invasive data. Given the large
dataset, Principal Component Analysis and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection were employed
for dimensionality reduction. Three unsupervised learning models—BIRCH, DBSCAN, and GMM—were
then applied to identify distinct student clusters. The results from the comparison revealed that the BIRCH
algorithm was the most effective in accurately categorizing students based on their activities. Further analysis
of identified clusters revealed a strong correlation between student engagement and academic outcomes,
with two high-risk clusters demonstrating the highest dropout rates. To better understand the reasons behind
the found clusters, the course duration was subsequently divided into intervals, and standard machine
learning methods were applied to predict at-risk students over time, confirming that early identification
of at-risk students using clustering is feasible. This study demonstrates the efficacy of non-invasive data
collection and unsupervised learning models in predicting student success, emphasizing the importance of
temporal and content-specific analysis. The proposed approach leverages clustering algorithms to enhance
the understanding of student behavior by identifying patterns and grouping students with similar learning
and engagement profiles. This supports the development of targeted interventions that are tailored to specific
student needs, ultimately improving retention and success.
INDEX TERMS Educational data mining, learning analytics, clustering analysis, dropout prediction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Educational data mining (EDM) and learning analytics (LA)
have been recognized as valuable research disciplines for
examining and predicting the behavior and performance of
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Senthil Kumar
.
current and future students. Furthermore, a significant rise
in the volume of data, improved data formats, technology
developments, and the accessibility of sophisticated analyt-
ical tools have all contributed to the growing use of LA
and EDM methods [1]. Predicting the dropout rate and
students’ academic performance holds significant impor-
tance in higher education, particularly within universities.
159336

 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ VOLUME 12, 2024
J. Pecuchova, M. Drlik: Enhancing the Early Student Dropout Prediction Model
However, many existing studies have relied heavily on super-
vised learning techniques or the use of sensitive personal
data, which may not be ideal for all educational con-
texts. There is a need for non-invasive methods that focus
solely on behavior-related data and can still yield accurate
predictions.
Higher education institutions are forced to continually
increase the quality of education despite the unstable eco-
nomic situation and societal changes, especially caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Maintaining enrollment levels through
program completion is vital for the sustainability of higher
education institutions, which further emphasizes the need for
data-driven approaches to understand and address student
retention challenges. Consequently, there is an imperative
need to employ innovative techniques that can provide deeper
insights into student engagement and behavior and predict
academic outcomes more accurately. This research addresses
this gap by exploring how unsupervised machine learning
techniques can be applied to data derived solely from stu-
dents’ interactions within Learning Management Systems
(LMS), offering a non-invasive way to predict academic out-
comes and identify at-risk students.
This research is motivated by the need to address the
challenges faced by higher education institutions, including
student dropout and the accurate prediction of academic
performance. Machine learning techniques have increasingly
been utilized to predict student performance at various edu-
cational levels. Traditional methods have often relied on
supervised machine learning techniques, which, while help-
ful, may not fully capture the complex dynamics of student
behavior in online learning environments [2], [3], [4].
In contrast, this study focuses on unsupervised learning
techniques, which have been less frequently applied in edu-
cational settings and offer the potential to uncover hidden
patterns in student behavior without the need for predefined
labels. The non-invasive approach to student data analysis
is ensured by leveraging data derived solely from online
learning systems. The primary emphasis of this article lies
in examining the potential of student interactions inside these
platforms to yield predictive insights while eliminating the
need to analyze sensitive demographic or extensive personal
data. More precisely, this article describes a study that exam-
ines log files stored in the LMS Moodle to determine if
valuable insights could be gained from student activities with-
out using personal or invasive data. Given the large dataset
size and the nature of log files, the data was preprocessed
using standard techniques. Subsequently, Principal Compo-
nent Analysis (PCA) was used for dimensionality reduction,
followed by the n

===== feduc-08-1244686.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Predictive analytics study to determine undergraduate students at risk of dropout
AUTHOR_META: Andres Gonzalez-Nucamendi
PAGES: 14
feduc-08-1244686 September 30, 2023 Time: 11:47 # 1
TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 02 October 2023
DOI 10.3389/feduc.2023.1244686
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Julius Nganji,
University of Toronto, Canada
REVIEWED BY
Antonio Luque,
University of Almería, Spain
Najah Al-Shanableh,
Al al-Bayt University, Jordan
*CORRESPONDENCE
Julieta Noguez
jnoguez@tec.mx
RECEIVED 22 June 2023
ACCEPTED 18 September 2023
PUBLISHED 02 October 2023
CITATION
Gonzalez-Nucamendi A, Noguez J, Neri L,
Robledo-Rella V and García-Castelán RMG
(2023) Predictive analytics study to determine
undergraduate students at risk of dropout.
Front. Educ. 8:1244686.
doi: 10.3389/feduc.2023.1244686
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Gonzalez-Nucamendi, Noguez, Neri,
Robledo-Rella and García-Castelán. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction
in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
are credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.
Predictive analytics study to
determine undergraduate
students at risk of dropout
Andres Gonzalez-Nucamendi, Julieta Noguez*, Luis Neri,
Víctor Robledo-Rella and
Rosa María Guadalupe García-Castelán
School of Engineering and Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey, Mexico
In this this work, a study is presented with quantitative variables using machine
learning tools to detect undergraduate students at risk of dropping out and the
factors associated with this behavior. Clustering algorithms and classiﬁcation
methods were tested to determine the predictive power of several variables
regarding the dropout phenomenon on an unbalanced database of 14,495
undergraduate students with a real dropout rate of 8.5% and a retention rate
of 91.5%. The usual classiﬁcation criterion that assigns individuals to a class if
their probability of belonging to it is greater than 50% provided accuracies of
13.2% in the dropout prediction and 99.4% in the retention prediction. Among
eight classiﬁers, Random Forest was selected and applied along with Threshold
Probability, which allowed us to gradually increase the dropout precision to more
than 50%, while maintaining retention and global precisions above 70%. Through
this study, it was found that the main variables associated with student dropouts
were their academic performance during the early weeks of the ﬁrst semester,
their average grade in the previous academic levels, the previous mathematics
score, and the entrance exam score. Other important variables were the number
of class hours being taken, student age, funding status of scholarships, English
level, and the number of dropped subjects in the early weeks. Given the trade-
off between dropout and retention precisions, our results can guide educational
institutions to focus on the most appropriate academic support strategies to help
students at real risk of dropping out.
KEYWORDS
student dropout, learning analytics, predictive models, higher education, educational
innovation, threshold probabilities, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
1. Introduction
The study of school dropouts is of interest at all educational levels. Reducing student
dropouts is an important challenge that high schools and higher education must face. The
loss of students who are beginning their high school or undergraduate studies constitutes
a worldwide concern (e.g., Heublein, 2014; Aulck et al., 2016; Hsu and Yeh, 2019; Olaya
et al., 2020). Several factors have been studied as the origins of dropping out, including
unfavorable sociodemographic conditions, insuﬃcient academic support, underprivileged
economic income, and poor academic and social capabilities. Quantitative research on the
Frontiers in Education 01 frontiersin.org
feduc-08-1244686 September 30, 2023 Time: 11:47 # 2
Gonzalez-Nucamendi et al. 10.3389/feduc.2023.1244686
causes and the possible solutions for dropping out has been
reported in the literature (e.g., Aulck et al., 2016; Garg et al., 2021).
The diﬃculty in conducting extensive research on student
dropouts is that many variables may play a simultaneously
important role. For example, academic failure may be caused by a
lack of clarity on the relevance of real-life scenarios (Cameron and
Heckman, 2001; Wexler and Pyle, 2012) and a lack of motivation
that gives rise to random class attendance. Moreover, some students
may have high rates of behavior problems because of a weak
family and home structure (Wexler and Pyle, 2012). Some families
place unrealistic expectations on their daughters and sons without
providing them with the required tools for success. The absence
of committed parents and family academic role models may also
play a key factor (Balfanz et al., 2007). On the other hand, ﬁrst-
generation students may need a supportive environment in their
schools to compensate for the sometimes-non-existent academic
structure found at home.
To address this problematic situation, the Institute of Education
and Science (US) has provided six recommendations to prevent
dropouts at school (Dynarski et al., 2008):
(1) Data systems should be aimed at the early detection of
students at risk.
(2) One-on-one tutoring is highly recommended for
this population.
(3) Academic support must be provided (extra oﬃce hours,
extra homework, etc.).
(4) Teaching social skills and providing speciﬁc programs
to round out the class experience should not
be underestimated.
(5) Personalized academic instruction must be an option.
(6) Focusing on lifelong competencies in addition to rigorous
and relevant instruction must also be considered.
Studying the impact of the diverse factors that produce
dropping out in middle and higher education has pushed
institutions to perform statistical studies to disclose the relative
importance of these factors and to apply suitable and timely
measures to predict students at risk of dropping out (Hsu and
Yeh, 2019). In this regard, the incorporation of learning analytics
techniques that involve simultaneous analysis of students’ social
and performance data can disclose the factors that have a larger
impact on dropping out. These techniques have contributed
to the improved accuracy of predictive models in recent years
(e.g., Amare and Simonova, 2021; Saravanan et al., 2022).
Nowadays, data analysis techniques are applied to large data
sets to better understand the relationships among the multiple
variables involved.
The present research should help improve the design of
institutional retention programs by tailoring them to students who
are at risk of dropping out but are the most likely to be retained
according to appropriate selection algorithms. In this context, we
use machine learning (ML) tools in terms of predictive analytics,
to identify potential students at risk and deﬁne the characteristics
that place them in s

===== Hong 等 - 2026 - Leveraging learning analytics to enhance immersive teacher simulations Challenges and opportunities.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: SUMIN
PAGES: 30
Leveraging learning analytics to enhance immersive teacher 
simulations: Challenges and opportunities1 
 
Sumin Hong, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea, hongxiumin@snu.ac.kr 
Jewoong Moon, The University of Alabama, AL 35401, USA,  jmoon19@ua.edu  
Taeyeon Eom, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea, eomcalm@gmail.com 
Juno Hwang, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea, wnsdh10@snu.ac.kr 
Jibeom Seo, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea, jabam1264@snu.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract 
This chapter examines how data analytics can be leveraged to enhance immersive teacher 
simulations, situating this inquiry within the broader learning sciences discourse on embodied 
cognition, data-informed feedback, and teacher professional learning. It explores both conceptual 
foundations and empirical cases to illustrate how analytics serve as mediational tools that 
connect immersive experiences with reflective teaching practice. The chapter unfolds in multiple 
sections: (1) The Innovation Journey: An Overview of Immersive Teacher Simulations outlines 
the evolution from traditional simulations to XR-based environments, highlighting the need for 
professional decision-making under realistic constraints. (2) Innovation in Existing Research and 
Practice situates teacher analytics within the trajectory from descriptive observation to 
multimodal and predictive modeling. (3) Study Approach and Design details how multimodal 
data—discourse, behavior, and gaze—from the TeacherGen@i simulation were collected and 
organized to reveal cognitive distribution of pedagogical discourse and interaction patterns. (4) 
Findings present the cognitive distribution of preservice teachers’ pedagogical discourse and the 
sequential interaction patterns that emerge in exchange, illustrating how multimodal analytics 
make pedagogical reasoning processes visible within immersive simulations. (5) Understanding 
Innovative Practices in Teacher Education examines teaching analytics to enhance immersive 
teacher simulation based on the findings of the study.  (6) Key Takeaways of the Innovation 
Journey identifies research challenges and design implications for scalable, analytics-enhanced 
teacher education. Together, these sections position immersive teacher simulations as a pivotal 
 
1 Corresponding author : Jewoong Moon, The University of Alabama, jmoon19@ua.edu  
testbed for aligning learning analytics, professional learning, and next-generation immersive 
learning environment design. 
 
Keywords: Teacher simulation, Teacher analytics, Learning analytics, Data-informed 
feedback, Teacher education 
 
 
The Innovation Journey: An Overview of Immersive Teacher Simulations 
In teacher education, simulation-based learning has been utilized as an important means 
to help both preservice and in-service teachers rehearse decision-making, reflection, and adaptive 
expertise in controlled yet authentic contexts (Kaufman & Ireland, 2016; Ledger et al., 2025). 
Traditional methods, such as case-based learning, role-play, and microteaching, have contributed 
to the development of lesson planning and problem-solving skills; however, they often lack 
sensorimotor engagement and ecological validity, which are key features that underlie authentic 
teaching experiences. In particular, traditional simulations are often limited to a small number of 
students, making it difficult to reproduce the diverse reactions and situations that occur in 
classrooms, as well as the complexity and unpredictability of real teaching. This, in turn, can 
constrain teachers’ ability to apply knowledge and skills effectively in authentic educational 
environments. 
Immersive teacher simulations address these gaps by situating practice within high-
fidelity virtual or mixed-reality environments that replicate classroom contingencies with greater 
ecological realism. There has been a transition from simple video-based simulations to more 
sophisticated mixed-reality simulations such as TeachLivE™ and simSchool (Dieker et al., 2023). 
They enable teachers to engage in repeated trials of the same scenario, test alternative responses, 
and observe system-level consequences of their actions, which collectively enhance the precision 
of professional judgment. In this sense, immersion is not merely a matter of sensory realism but a 
design principle that supports cognitive realism, indicating the alignment between simulated and 
real-world design processes (Badiee & Kaufman, 2015; Codreanu, E. et al., 2020).  
This integration of emerging technologies, such as VR and AR, and generative artificial 
intelligence (GenAI) has further extended the reach of simulation-based teacher education. 
GenAI agents now allow dynamic, unscripted interactions that approximate the fluid discourse 

===== J.COMPCHEMENG.2008.12.012.pdf =====
TITLE_META: doi:10.1016/j.compchemeng.2008.12.012
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 20
Computers and Chemical Engineering 33 (2009) 795–814
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers and Chemical Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compchemeng
Review
Data-driven Soft Sensors in the process industry
Petr Kadlec a, Bogdan Gabrys a,∗, Sibylle Strandt b
a Smart Technology Research Centre, Computational Intelligence Research Group, Bournemouth University, Poole BH12 5BB, United Kingdom
b Evonik Degussa AG, 45128 Essen, Germany
article info
Article history:
Received 1 7 March 2008
Received in revised form
27 November 2008
Accepted 30 December 2008
Available online 20 January 2009
Keywords:
Soft Sensors
Process industry
Data-driven models
PCA
ANN
abstract
In the last two decades Soft Sensors established themselves as a valuable alternative to the traditional
means for the acquisition of critical process variables, process monitoring and other tasks which are
related to process control. This paper discusses characteristics of the process industry data which are crit-
ical for the development of data-driven Soft Sensors. These characteristics are common to a large number
of process industry ﬁelds, like the chemical industry, bioprocess industry, steel industry, etc. The focus
of this work is put on the data-driven Soft Sensors because of their growing popularity, already demon-
strated usefulness and huge, though yet not completely realised, potential. A comprehensive selection of
case studies covering the three most important Soft Sensor application ﬁelds, a general introduction to
the most popular Soft Sensor modelling techniques as well as a discussion of some open issues in the
Soft Sensor development and maintenance and their possible solutions are the main contributions of this
work.
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................... .......... 7 9 6
2. Industrial processes ............................................................................................................................... . . 797
2.1. Industrial process types ...................................................................................................................... 7 9 7
2.1.1. Continuous processes ............................................................................................................... 7 9 7
2.1.2. Batch processes ..................................................................................................................... 7 9 7
2.2. Characteristics of process industry data ..................................................................................................... 7 9 7
2.2.1. Missing values ...................................................................................................................... 7 9 7
2.2.2. Data outliers ....................................................................................................................... 7 9 8
2.2.3. Drifting data ....................................................................................................................... 7 9 8
2.2.4. Data co-linearity ................................................................................................................... 7 9 8
2.2.5. Sampling rates and measurement delays ......................................................................................... 7 9 9
3. Soft Sensors in the process industry ................................................................................................................ 7 9 9
3.1. Model-driven and data-driven Soft Sensors ................................................................................................. 7 9 9
3.2. Soft Sensor development methodology ..................................................................................................... 7 9 9
3.2.1. First data inspection ................................................................................................................ 8 0 0
3.2.2. Selection of historical data and identiﬁcation of stationary states ................................................................ 8 0 0
3.2.3. Data pre-processing ............................................................................................................... 8 0 0
3.2.4. Model selection, training and validation .......................................................................................... 8 0 0
3.2.5. Soft Sensor maintenance ........................................................................................................... 8 0 1
3.2.6. Related methodologies ............................................................................................................. 8 0 1
3.3. Soft Sensor applications ..................................................................................................................... 8 0 1
3.3.1. On-line prediction .................................................................................................................. 8 0 1
3.3.2. Process monitoring and process fault detection ................................................................................... 8 0 4
3.3.3. Sensor fault detection and reconstruction ......................................................................................... 8 0 5
3.3.4. Soft Sensor applications summary ................................................................................................ 8 0 6
3.3.5. Further reviews of Soft Sensor applications ...................................................................................... 8 0 6
∗ Correspondingauthor at: Bournemouth University, Computational Intelligence Research Group, Smart Technology Research Centre, Poole House, Tal bot Campus,
Fern Barrow, Poole BH12 5BB, United Kingdom. Tel.: +44 1202965298; fax: +44 1202965314.
E-mail address: bgabrys@bournemouth.ac.uk (B. Gabrys).
0098-1354/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.compchemeng.2008.12.012
796 P. Kadlec et al. / Computers and Chemical Engineering 33 (2009) 795–814
4. Data-driven methods for soft sensing .............................................................................................................. 8 0 6
4.1. Principle Component Analysis ............................................................................................................... 8 0 7
4.2. Partial Least Squares ......................................................................................................................... 8 0 8
4.3. Artiﬁcial neural networks ................................................................................................................... 8 0 8
4.4. Neuro-Fuzzy Systems ........................................................................................................................ 8 0 9
4.5. Support Vector Machines ...................................................

===== JCAL.12392.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Analytics of time management strategies in a flipped classroom
AUTHOR_META: Nora'ayu Ahmad Uzir, Dragan Gašević, Wannisa Matcha, Jelena Jovanović, Abelardo Pardo
PAGES: 19
ARTICLE
Analytics of time management strategies in a flipped classroom
Nora'ayu Ahmad Uzir 1,2 | Dragan Ga šević3 | Wannisa Matcha 1 |
Jelena Jovanovi ć4 | Abelardo Pardo 5
1 School of Informatics, The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
2 Faculty of Information Management,
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Shah Alam,
Malaysia
3 Faculty of Information Technology, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia
4 School of Business Administration, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
5 Division of Information Technology,
Engineering and the Environment, University
of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia
Correspondence
Nora'ayu Ahmad Uzir, School of Informatics,
The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
Email: n.uzir@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper aims to explore time management strategies followed by students in a
flipped classroom through the analysis of trace data. Specifically, an exploratory study
was conducted on the dataset collected in three consecutive offerings of an under-
graduate computer engineering course ( N = 1,134). Trace data about activities were
initially coded for the timeliness of activity completion. Such data were then analysed
using agglomerative hierarchical clustering based on Ward's algorithm, first order
Markov chains, and inferential statistics to (a) detect time management tactics and
strategies from students' learning activities and (b) analyse the effects of personalized
analytics‐based feedback on time management. The results indicate that meaningful
and theoretically relevant time management patterns can be detected from trace data
as manifestations of students' tactics and strategies. The study also showed that time
management tactics had significant associations with academic performance and
were associated with different interventions in personalized analytics ‐based
feedback.
KEYWORDS
flipped learning, learning analytics, self‐regulated learning, time management
1 | INTRODUCTION
Within the higher education context, the transition from traditional
education to online and blended courses provides students with a
great opportunity to access learning resources conveniently. How-
ever, it also introduces a tremendous challenge for students to main-
tain motivation and active engagement aligned with designated
academic goals. This is particularly the case in the flipped learning
context, where students are required to actively participate both in
online preparation (pre ‐class) and face ‐to‐face (in class) activities
(He, Holton, Farkas, & Warschauer, 2016). However, students
are often unprepared, struggling with regulation of their time and
effort, especially during pre ‐class activities (Heinerichs, Pazzaglia,
& Gilboy, 2016). Recent research reveals that ineffective time
management and low self ‐regulation skills are the most commonly
cited combination of unsuccessful learning factors (Petersen, Craig,
Campbell, & Tafliovich, 2016; Thibodeaux, Deutsch, Kitsantas, &
Winsler, 2017).
From self ‐regulated learning (SRL) perspective, students should be
able to adjust and adapt their learning strategies and time use after
reflecting on their performance (Thibodeaux et al., 2017). According
to the Winne and Hadwin's four ‐phase model of SRL (Winne &
Hadwin, 1998), students manage their learning by making a clear def-
inition of the task at hand, by setting up goals, and by choosing strat-
egies to achieve those goals. This is followed by enacting the tactics
and strategies chosen to conduct their learning and, finally, by evaluat-
ing the effectiveness of their learning strategies based on internal (e.g.,
prior knowledge and experience) and external standards (e.g., feed-
back from teacher) for future improvement (Winne, 2014). Hence,
the capacity of students to plan and invest time in learning, to follow
Received: 2 January 2019 Revised: 18 July 2019 Accepted: 25 August 2019
DOI: 10.1111/jcal.12392
J Comput Assist Learn . 2019;1 –19. © 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltdwileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jcal 1

a highly structured schedule, and to balance proactively the use of
time are essential parts of self ‐regulation (St, Macan, Dipboye, & Phil-
lips, 1990; Thibodeaux et al., 2017). The need for strong self ‐
regulation and time management skills has also been recognized by
studies that found their significant positive associations with academic
performance (Hensley, Wolters, Won, & Brady, 2018; Nguyen,
Huptych, & Rienties, 2018; Thibodeaux et al., 2017). All this clearly
points to the relevance of time management skills.
There has been a lacuna in research that aims to understand how
students manage their time in online preparation activities within the
flipped classroom context. Even if particular approaches to time man-
agement can be identified, there is equally limited research on the
extent to which such differences are associated with academic suc-
cess. To address these two gaps in the literature, the objective of the
current study is to propose and empirically demonstrate the value of
a learning analytics ‐based methodology for identification of tactics
and strategies of time management. This is achieved by making use
of trace data recorded by digital learning environments and analysing
these data with advanced data science methods. As such, the proposed
methodology overcomes the limitations of self ‐reported measures of
time management and SRL including their static nature and inherit bias
(Jovanović,G a šević, Pardo, Dawson, & Whitelock ‐Wainwright, 2019;
Winne & Jamieson ‐Noel, 2003; Zhou & Winne, 2012).
The presented analytics ‐based methodology builds upon recent
research in learning analytics that proposed methodologies for detec-
tion of learning tactics and strategies. According to Fincham, Gasevic,
Jovanovic, and Pardo (2019) and Matcha, Ga šević, Uzir, Jovanović, and
Pardo (2019), learning tactics are reflective of students' cognitive rou-
tines used for performing specified tasks, whereas learning strategies
look into how students use several tactics over the course timeline.
Furthermore, existing research shows that learning tactics and strate-
gies, detected using analytics ‐based approaches, are associated with
course performance and satisfaction (Fincham et al., 2019; Jovanovic,
Gasevic, Dawson, Pardo, & Mirriahi, 2017; Matcha et al., 2019; Pardo,
Gasevic, Jovanovic, Dawson, & Mirriahi, 2018) and can be used as a
sound foundation for providing analytics ‐based personalized feedback
at scale (Pardo, 2019). We posit that time management tactics and
strategies have equal potential to yield useful information in the form
of feedback to improve future learning. However, based on our knowl-
edge, the current literature offers very limited evidence of time man-
agement tactic and strategies that students employ in the flipped
model. Therefore, this study aims to contribute to this line of research.
The value of feedback for promoting effective time management
practices in flipped classrooms is still underexplored

===== JCAL.12453.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Students' self‐report and observed learning orientations in blended university course design: How are they related to each other and to academic performance?
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 12
ARTICLE
Students' self-report and observed learning orientations in
blended university course design: How are they related to each
other and to academic performance?
Feifei Han1,2 | Abelardo Pardo 3 | Robert A. Ellis 1
1Office of Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Arts,
Education and Law), Griffith University,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
2Griffith Institute for Educational Research,
Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia
3Division of Information Technology,
Engineering and the Environment, Australia
Correspondence
Feifei Han, Office of Pro-Vice-Chancellor
(Arts, Education and Law), Griffith University,
Room 3.17D, Building M06, Mt Gravatt
Campus, Brisbane, QLD 4122, Australia.
Email: feifei.han@griffith.edu.au
Funding information
Australian Research Council, Grant/Award
Number: DP150104163
Abstract
This study examines the extent to which the learning orientations identified by stu-
dent self-reports and the observation of their online learning events were related to
each other and to their academic performance. The participants were 322 first-year
engineering undergraduates, who were enrolled in a blended course. Using students'
self-report on a questionnaire about their approaches to learning and perceptions of
the blended learning environment, ‘understanding’ and ‘reproducing’ learning orienta-
tions were identified. Using observations of student activity online, a Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) and agglomerative sequence clustering detected four qualitatively dif-
ferent patterns of online learning orientations. Cross-tabulations showed significant
and logical associations amongst the learning orientations derived by the self-report
and observational methods. Significant differences were also consistently found in
the students' academic performance across the mid-term and final assessments
based on their learning orientations detected by both self-report and observational
methods, results which have important implications for learning research.
KEYWORDS
blended university course design, learning analytics, learning orientations, observed data, self-
report data, student approaches to learning
1 | INTRODUCTION
University student experiences of learning are becoming increasingly
complex because of the introduction of learning technologies which
require students to move forth and back between classroom and
online contexts in the pursuit of learning outcomes. This increasing
complexity means that being able to discern the aspects of successful
experiences of learning in blended contexts is also becoming more dif-
ficult (López-Pérez, López-Pérez, & Rodríguez-Ariza, 2011; Wu, Ten-
nyson, & Hsia, 2010). While some research argues that learning
technologies offer potential to enhance the overall quality of learning
experiences (Garrison & Kanuka, 2004), the same research also notes
that there is significant interdependency between the technologies
and students' learning experience when they interact with teaching
staff and peers face-to-face. University student experiences of
blended course design combine aspects related to learning spaces
(Ellis & Goodyear, 2016), approaches to learning (Prosser &
Trigwell, 2017), social interactions (Hadwin & Oshige, 2011), different
devices used for engagement (Laurillard, 2013), and a variety of other
resources available in physical and virtual learning environments
(Ellis & Goodyear, 2019).
In recent years, the areas of educational data mining and learning
analytics (Baker & Siemens, 2014) have studied how large scale data
collection derived from technologies can be used to increase the
understanding and improvement of the quality of student learning
experiences (Siemens & Ga ševi/C19c, 2012). Although the area has
addressed challenging problems in the higher education sector, such
as student retention (Dawson, Jovanovic, Ga ševi/C19c, & Pardo, 2017),
academic success (Tanes, Arnold, King, & Remnet, 2011), social pres-
ence (Joksimovi /C19c, Ga ševi/C19c, Kovanovi /C19c, Riecke, & Hatala, 2015),
Received: 31 October 2019 Revised: 22 March 2020 Accepted: 25 April 2020
DOI: 10.1111/jcal.12453
J Comput Assist Learn. 2020;1–12. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jcal © 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd 1

learning design (Tempelaar, Rienties, & Giesbers, 2015), and education
policy (Ferguson et al., 2016), current approaches and solutions are
largely fragmented from educational theory (Ga ševi/C19c, Dawson, &
Siemens, 2015). There is a tendency in current approaches to rely on
empiricism rather than to be guided by theoretical perspectives. Left
unchecked we will be in danger of pursing numbers without being
able to contextualize their meaning.
This disconnection needs to be addressed in the design of
research into student learning in blended course designs. The student
experience of learning is now mediated by a wide variety of factors
emerging from physical, cognitive, social, material aspects across
physical and virtual learning spaces, which form types of educational
ecologies (Ellis & Goodyear, 2019). Understanding which aspects of
such ecologies are most responsible for quality learning outcomes
requires research approaches that are theoretically driven and offer
triangulation strategies to confirm outcomes. One approach to
achieve this is to combine multiple methodologies and data sources to
present a more comprehensive picture of student learning experi-
ences in blended contexts.
The study described in this article is designed to benefit from
using both self-report evidence of student approaches to, and percep-
tions of learning; and observed evidence of student online activity to
increase our understanding of student experiences in blended course
design. More specifically, the research has two aims: (a) to examine
the level of consistency between students' self-report learning orien-
tations from surveys designed using the student approaches to learn-
ing (SAL) framework (Biggs & Tang, 2011; Prosser & Trigwell, 1999)
and their observed learning orientations generated from the learning
analytics and (b) to investigate the relations between students' learn-
ing orientations identified from the self-report and observational
methods and their academic performance. The following
section reviews the related research in SAL and learning analytics
(Baker & Siemens, 2014).
2 | LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 | Student approaches to learning research
SAL is a well-recognized research framework into university student
learning (Pintrich, 2004). It focuses on exploring the factors that dis-
tinguish qualitatively different student learning experiences that
explain student academic performance (Prosser & Trigwell, 2017).
Research in this area mostly uses self-report surveys to examine con-
ceptions, approaches and perceptions in the student experience of
learning (Biggs & Tang, 2011; Prosser & Trigwell, 1999;
Ramsden, 2003). A key outcome from this research is the identifica-
tion of deep and surface approaches to learning, which have logical
and robust associat

===== JOURNAL.PONE.0118432.pdf =====
TITLE_META: The Precision-Recall Plot Is More Informative than the ROC Plot When Evaluating Binary Classifiers on Imbalanced Datasets
AUTHOR_META: Takaya Saito, Marc Rehmsmeier
PAGES: 21
RESEARCH ARTICLE
The Precision-Recall Plot Is More Informative
than the ROC Plot When Evaluating Binary
Classifiers on Imbalanced Datasets
Takaya Saito*, Marc Rehmsmeier*
Computational Biology Unit, Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, P. O. Box 7803, N-5020,
Bergen, Norway
* takaya.saito@ii.uib.no (TS); marc.rehmsmeier@ii.uib.no (MR)
Abstract
Binary classifiers are routinely evaluated with performance measures such as sensitivity
and specificity, and performance is frequently illustrated with Receiver Operating Character-
istics (ROC) plots. Alternative measures such as positive predictive value (PPV) and the as-
sociated Precision/Recall (PRC) plots are used less frequently. Many bioinformatics studies
develop and evaluate classifiers that are to be applied to strongly imbalanced datasets in
which the number of negatives outweighs the number of positives significantly. While ROC
plots are visually appealing and provide an overview of a classifier's performance across a
wide range of specificities, one can ask whether ROC plots could be misleading when ap-
plied in imbalanced classification scenarios. We show here that the visual interpretability of
ROC plots in the context of imbalanced datasets can be deceptive with respect to conclu-
sions about the reliability of classification performance, owing to an intuitive but wrong inter-
pretation of specificity. PRC plots, on the other hand, can provide the viewer with an
accurate prediction of future classification performance due to the fact that they evaluate
the fraction of true positives among positive predictions. Our findings have potential implica-
tions for the interpretation of a large number of studies that use ROC plots on
imbalanced datasets.
Introduction
Binary classifiers are statistical and computational models that divide a dataset into two groups,
positives and negatives. They have been successfully applied to a wide range of biological and
medical problems in recent years [ 1–3]. The evaluation of a classifier's prediction performance
is of great importance in order to be able to judge its usefulness, also in comparison to compet-
ing methods. Commonly used measures of classifier performance in the phase of model con-
struction are accuracy, error rate, and the Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristics
(ROC) curve (AUC) [4]. Various additional measures are useful for the evaluation of the final
model, and several plots provide visual representations, such as ROC and Precision-Recall
(PRC) plots [5].
PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0118432 March 4, 2015 1/2 1
OPEN ACCESS
Citation: Saito T, Rehmsmeier M (2015) The
Precision-Recall Plot Is More Informative than the
ROC Plot When Evaluating Binary Classifiers on
Imbalanced Datasets. PLoS ONE 10(3): e0118432.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0118432
Academic Editor: Guy Brock, University of
Louisville, UNITED STATES
Received: June 23, 2014
Accepted: January 16, 2015
Published: March 4, 2015
Copyright: © 2015 Saito, Rehmsmeier. This is an
open access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author and source are
credited.
Data Availability Statement: Data are available from
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1245061.
Funding: The authors have no funding or support to
report.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
Class imbalance —a difference in the numbers of positive and negative instances, usually
with the negatives outnumbering the positives —occurs in a wide range of scientific areas, in-
cluding the life sciences, where unequal class distributions arise naturally [ 6–9]. The classifi-
cation of imbalanced datasets is a relatively new challenge in the field of machine learning
[5, 10]. While many solutions for binary classification on imbalanced data have been pro-
posed [5, 11], they are mostly related to either data resampling [ 7, 12–14] or model-training
[15–19]. Despite the development of state-of-the-art solutions for the building of classifiers
with imbalanced data [ 5, 11, 20], selecting a suitable performance evaluation method is
often underestimated.
It is important to recognize that the evaluation in the training phase is different from the
evaluation of the final model. The first phase is to select the most effective and robust model
during training. It usually divides a training dataset further into training and validation subsets,
for example for cross-validation [ 21]. The second phase is to evaluate the final model after the
training. Ideally, the test data of this phase reflects the class distributions of the original popula-
tion even though such distributions are usually unknown. This article exclusively analyses the
performance evaluation of the final model.
The rapid expansion in high-throughput biological experiments produces a number of
large-sized datasets, and the majority of such datasets can be expected to be imbalanced [ 8, 22,
23]. Here, we review the theoretical background of commonly used evaluation measures, spe-
cifically ROC [24, 25], PRC [26], concentrated ROC (CROC) [ 27], and Cost Curves (CC) [ 28].
ROC is the most popular evaluation method for binary classifiers, but the interpretation of
ROC curves requires a special caution when used with imbalanced datasets [ 29]. ROC alterna-
tives, PRC, CROC, and CC, are less popular than ROC, but they are known to be robust even
under imbalanced datasets [26–28]. In this study, we aim to clarify the difference between
these measures from several different perspectives, addressing a computational-biology/life-
sciences audience. To achieve this goal, we first introduce the basic single-threshold measures
such as specificity and sensitivity, followed by the introduction of ROC and ROC alternative
plots. We then discuss precision as an informative measure under imbalanced data as well as
PRC that itself is based on precision. In a simulation study we analyse the behaviour and the
utility of ROC, PRC, CROC, and CC when applied in the context of imbalanced datasets. The
simulations use randomly generated samples with different performance levels. Subsequently,
we show the results of a literature analysis that investigates what evaluation measures are used
in real-world studies on imbalanced datasets. The literature analysis is based on two sets of
PubMed search results. In addition, we re-analyse classifier performance from a previously
published study, on a popular microRNA gene discovery algorithm called MiRFinder [ 30]. We
also include a short review of available evaluation tools.
Theoretical Background
Through the Theoretical Background section, we review the performance measures including
basic measures from the confusion matrix and threshold-free measures such as ROC and PRC.
We also include simple examples where necessary and a short introduction of tools. We use
three distinc

===== s007790170019.pdf =====
TITLE_META: PTECH-138 4..7
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 4
Understanding and Using Context
Anind K. Dey
College of Computing & GVU Center, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
Abstract: Context is a poorly used source of information in our computing environments. As a result, we have an impoverished
understanding of what context is and how it can be used. In this paper, we provide an operational deﬁnition of context and discuss the
different ways in which context can be used by context-aware applications. We also present the Context Toolkit, an architecture that
supports the building of these context-aware applications. We discuss the features and abstractions in the toolkit that make the task of
building applications easier. Finally, we introduce a new abstraction, a situation which we believe will provide additional support to
application designers.
Keywords: Application support; Context; Context-awareness; Situation-awareness
1. Introduction
Humans are quite successful at conveying ideas
to each other and reacting appropriately. This is
due to many factors: the richness of the language
they share, the common understanding of how
the world works, and an implicit understanding
of everyday situations. When humans talk with
humans, they are able to use implicit situational
information, or context, to increase the conversa-
tional bandwidth. Unfortunately, this ability to
convey ideas does not transfer well to humans
interacting with computers. In traditional inter-
active computing, users have an impoverished
mechanism for providing input to computers.
Consequently, computers are not currently
enabled to take full advantage of the context
of the human-computer dialogue. By improving
the computer’s access to context, we increase the
richness of communication in human-computer
interaction and make it possible to produce more
useful computational services.
In order to use context effectively, we must
understand what context is and how it can be
used, and we must have architectural support.
An understanding of context will enable appli-
cation designers to choose what context to use in
their applications. An understanding of how
context can be used will help application
designers determine what context-aware beha-
viours to support in their applications. Finally,
architectural support will enable designers to
build their applications more easily. This archi-
tectural support has two parts: services and
abstractions.
In this paper, we will review previous
attempts to deﬁne and provide a characterisation
of context and context-aware computing, and
then present our own deﬁnition and character-
isation. We then discuss how this increased
understanding informs the development of a
shared infrastructure, the Context Toolkit
1, for
context-sensing and context-aware application
development. We discuss both the services
offered by the toolkit and the programming
abstractions it provides to designers.
2. What is Context?
To develop a speciﬁc deﬁnition that can be used
prescriptively in the context-aware computing
ﬁeld, we will look at how researchers have
attempted to deﬁne context in their own work.
While most people tacitly understand what
context is, they ﬁnd it hard to elucidate. Previous
deﬁnitions of context are done by enumeration
of examples or by choosing synonyms for
context.
2.1. Previous deﬁnitions of context
In the work that ﬁrst introduces the term
‘‘context-aware’’, Schilit and Theimer [1] refer
to context as location, identities of nearby
4
# Springer-Verlag London Ltd
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing (2001) 5:4–7
1The Context Toolkit can be downloaded from http://
www.cc.gatech.edu/fce/contexttoolkit
people and objects, and changes to those objects.
These types of deﬁnitions that deﬁne context by
example are difﬁcult to apply. When we want to
determine whether a type of information not
listed in the deﬁnition is context or not, it is not
clear how we can use the deﬁnition to solve the
dilemma.
Other deﬁnitions have simply provided syno-
nyms for context; for example, referring to
context as the environment or situation [2–4].
As with the deﬁnitions by example, deﬁnitions
that simply use synonyms for context are
extremely difﬁcult to apply in practice. The
deﬁnitions by Schilit et al. [5] and Pascoe [6] are
closest in spirit to the operational deﬁnition we
desire. Schilit et al. claim that the important
aspects of context are: where you are, who you
are with, and what resources are nearby. Pascoe
deﬁnes context to be the subset of physical and
conceptual states of interest to a particular
entity. These deﬁnitions are too speciﬁc. Con-
text is all about the whole situation relevant to
an application and its set of users. We cannot
enumerate which aspects of all situations are
important, as these will change from situation to
situation. For this reason, we could not use these
deﬁnitions provided.
2.2. Our deﬁnition of context
Context is any information that can be used to characterise the
situation of an entity. An entity is a person, place, or object that is
considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an
application, including the user and applications themselves.
This deﬁnition makes it easier for an application
developer to enumerate the context for a given
application scenario. If a piece of information
can be used to characterise the situation of a
participant in an interaction, then that informa-
tion is context. Take the canonical context-
aware application, an indoor mobile tour guide,
as an example. The obvious entities in this
example are the user, the application and the
tour sites. We will look at two pieces of
information – weather and the presence of
other people – and use the deﬁnition to
determine whether either one is context. The
weather does not affect the application because
it is being used indoors. Therefore, it is not
context. The presence of other people, however,
can be used to characterise the user’s situation. If
a user is travelling with other people, then the
sites they visit may be of particular interest to
them. Therefore, the presence of other people is
context because it can be used to characterise
the user’s situation.
3. Deﬁning Context-Aware
Computing
Context-aware computing was ﬁrst discussed by
Schilit and Theimer [1] in 1994 as software that
‘‘adapts according to its location of use, the
collection of nearby people and objects, as well
as changes to those objects over time’’. Since
then, there have been numerous attempts to
deﬁne context-aware computing, most of which
have been too speciﬁc [7].
3.1. Our deﬁnition of context-aware
A system is context-aware if it uses context to provide relevant
information and/or services to the user, where relevancy depends
on the user’s task.
We have chosen a general deﬁnition of context-
aware computing. When we try to apply previous
deﬁnitions to established context-aware applica-
tions, we ﬁnd that they do not ﬁt.
3.2. Features for context-aware
applications
Similar to the problem of deﬁning context-
aware, researchers have

===== s10115-023-01952-0.pdf =====
TITLE_META: A review and evaluation of elastic distance functions for time series clustering
AUTHOR_META: Christopher Holder 
PAGES: 45
Knowledge and Information Systems (2024) 66:765–809
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-023-01952-0
REVIEW
A review and evaluation of elastic distance functions for time
series clustering
Christopher Holder 1 · Matthew Middlehurst 1 · Anthony Bagnall 1
Received: 11 May 2023 / Revised: 2 July 2023 / Accepted: 25 July 2023 /
Published online: 7 September 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Time series clustering is the act of grouping time series data without recourse to a label.
Algorithms that cluster time series can be classiﬁed into two groups: those that employ a
time series speciﬁc distance measure and those that derive features from time series. Both
approaches usually rely on traditional clustering algorithms such as k-means. Our focus is
on partitional clustering algorithms that employ elastic distance measures, i.e. distances that
perform some kind of realignment whilst measuring distance. We describe nine commonly
used elastic distance measures and compare their performance with k-means and k-medoids
clusterer. Our ﬁndings, based on experiments using the UCR time series archive, are surpris-
ing. We ﬁnd that, generally, clustering with DTW distance is not better than using Euclidean
distance and that distance measures that employ editing in conjunction with warping are
signiﬁcantly better than other approaches. We further observe that using k-medoids clusterer
rather than k-means improves the clusterings for all nine elastic distance measures. One func-
tion, the move–split–merge (MSM) distance, is the best performing algorithm of this study,
with time warp edit (TWE) distance a close second. Our conclusion is that MSM or TWE
with k-medoids clusterer should be considered as a good alternative to DTW for clustering
time series with elastic distance measures. We provide implementations, extensive results
and guidance on reproducing results on the associated GitHub repository.
Keywords Time series clustering · Dynamic time warping · Dynamic barycentre
averaging · Move–split–merge · Edit distance with real penalty · Time warp edit distance ·
Derivative dynamic time warping · Longest common subsequence · Edit distance on real
sequences · Weighted dynamic time warping · Weighted derivative dynamic time warping ·
k-Means · k-medoids clusterer
B Anthony Bagnall
ajb@uea.ac.uk
Christopher Holder
c.holder@uea.ac.uk
Matthew Middlehurst
m.middlehurst@uea.ac.uk
1 School of Computing Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
123
766 C. Holder et al.
1 Introduction
Clustering is an unsupervised analysis technique where a set of cases, deﬁned as a vector of
continuous or discrete variables, are grouped to create clusters which contain cases considered
to be homogeneous, whereas cases in different clusters are considered heterogeneous [ 12].
Time series clustering is the act of grouping ordered, time series data without recourse to
a label. We use the acronym TSCL for time series clustering, to make a distinction between
TSCL and time series classiﬁcation, which is commonly referred to as TSC. There has been
a wide range of algorithms proposed for TSCL. Our focus is speciﬁcally on clustering using
elastic distance measures, i.e. distance measures that use some form of realignment of the
series being compared. Our aim is to perform a comparative study of these algorithms that
follows the basic structure of bake offs in distance-based TSC [ 44], univariate TSC [ 8]a n d
multivariate TSC [ 60]. A huge number of alternative transformation-based, e.g. [ 42], deep
learning-based clustering algorithms, e.g. [ 39], and statistical model-based approaches [ 15]
have been proposed for TSCL. These approaches are not the focus of this research. Our
primary aim is to provide a detailed description, with examples, of nine commonly used
elastic distance measures and conduct extensive experimentation to compare their utility for
TSCL. k-means is by far the most popular clustering algorithm for TSCL (for example, [33]).
k-medoids clusterer is used much less frequently. Our secondary aim is to compare k-means
and k-medoid distance-based clustering for TSCL.
Clustering is often the starting point for exploratory data analysis and is widely performed
in all ﬁelds of data science [ 74]. However, clustering is harder to deﬁne than, for example,
classiﬁcation. There is debate about what clustering means [ 31] and no accepted standard
deﬁnition of what constitutes good clustering or what it means for cases to be homogeneous or
heterogeneous. For example, homogeneous could mean generated by some common under-
lying process or mean it has some hidden variable in common. A clustering of patients based
on some medical data might group all male patients in one cluster and all female patients in
another. The clusters are from one view homogeneous, but that does not mean it is necessar-
ily a good clustering. The interpretation of the usefulness of clustering a particular dataset
requires domain knowledge. This makes comparing algorithms over a range of problems
more difﬁcult than performing a bake off of TSC algorithms. Nevertheless, there have been
numerous comparative studies (for example, [2, 33]a n d[39]) which take TSC problems from
the UCR archive [ 18] and then evaluate clusterings based on how well they recreate class
labels. We aim to add to this body of knowledge with a detailed description and a reproducible
evaluation of clustering with elastic distance measures (described in Sect.3) following a sim-
ilar methodology. We do this in the context of partitional clustering algorithms (see Sect. 2).
We stress that our ﬁndings relate only to performance on the UCR univariate datasets and
that our conclusions should be taken in that context. We think that our ﬁndings are useful for
practitioners wanting a benchmark for a TSCL problem, but there are always use cases for
different approaches.
Elastic distance measures are signiﬁcantly more accurate on average than Euclidean dis-
tance for TSC when used with a one nearest neighbour classiﬁer [ 44]. We evaluate whether
this improvement translates to centroid-based clustering. Following experiments presented in
Sect. 5.1, we conclude that, somewhat surprisingly, this is not the case with k-means cluster-
ing. Using standard default parameters, only one elastic distance measure, move–split–merge
(MSM) [67], is signiﬁcantly better than Euclidean distance, and ﬁve of those considered are
signiﬁcantly worse, including the most popular approach, dynamic time warping (DTW).
The pattern of results is the same if we cluster the raw data or normalise it ﬁrst. We repeat our
123

===== s10639-021-10742-6.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Revealing latent traits in the social behavior of distance learning students
AUTHOR_META:  Rozita Tsoni
PAGES: 37
Vol.:(0123456789)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-021-10742-6
1 3
Revealing latent traits in the social behavior of distance 
learning students
Rozita Tsoni1  · Christos Τ. Panagiotakopoulos2 · Vassilios S. Verykios1
Received: 25 May 2021 / Accepted: 2 September 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2021
Abstract
This paper proposes a multilayered methodology for analyzing distance learning stu-
dents’ data to gain insight into the learning progress of the student subjects both 
in an individual basis and as members of a learning community during the course 
taking process. The communication aspect is of high importance in educational 
research. Additionally, it is difficult to assess as it involves multiple relationships 
and different levels of interaction. Social network analysis (SNA) allows the visu -
alization of this complexity and provides quantified measures for evaluation. Thus, 
initially, SNA techniques were applied to create one-mode, undirected networks and 
capture important metrics originating from students’ interactions in the fora of the 
courses offered in the context of distance learning programs. Principal component 
analysis and clustering were used next to reveal latent students’ traits and common 
patterns in their social interactions with other students and their learning behavior. 
We selected two different courses to test this methodology and to highlight conver -
gent and divergent features between them. Three major factors that explain over 70% 
of the variance were identified and four groups of students were found, characterized 
by common elements in students’ learning profile. The results highlight the impor -
tance of academic performance, social behavior and online participation as the main 
criteria for clustering that could be helpful for tutors in distance learning to closely 
monitor the learning process and promptly interevent when needed.
 * Rozita Tsoni 
 rozita.tsoni@ac.eap.gr
 Christos Τ. Panagiotakopoulos 
 cpanag@upatras.gr
 Vassilios S. Verykios 
 verykios@eap.gr
1 School of Science and Technology, Hellenic Open University, Patras, Greece
2 Department of Primary Education, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, University 
of P atras, Patras, Greece
Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:3529–3565
Published online: 29 September 2021/
1 3
Keywords Dis tance learning · Learning Analytics · Social Network Analysis · 
Principal Components Analysis · Clustering · Discussion Forum
1 Introduction
Distance Learning emerged as a field almost a century ago (Valentine, 2002). 
However, lately, new powerful tools and massive changes in the educational 
demand have brought Distance Learning into the spotlight of our personal and 
social lives. Two milestones cultivated the hype of online learning in the past 
decade: the rise of MOOCs and the Covid-19 pandemic. The revolution brought 
about by the massive participation in MOOCs and the proliferation of Open Edu-
cational Resources originated in conventional universities that mainly provided 
face-to-face courses (MIT, Stanford, Yale, etc.) New educational models that 
fueled participation were adopted but at the same time, the dropout rates were 
skyrocketed (Laurillard et al., 2018). The massive public acceptance and adop-
tion of online courses created significant challenges and urged researchers of the 
educational field to find answers to important questions concerning teaching and 
learning quality, learners’ behavior, policies, educational design, and many other 
relevant issues.
In this already marginal situation, the crisis of the Covid19 pandemic came 
along, forcing the need for emergency measures to be taken hastily. To the ears 
of the inexperienced and novice in Distance Education methodology, every effort 
allocated towards the preservation of the educational process offering from dis-
tance was simply considered a “distance education program”. Nevertheless, in 
most cases, what was actually happening can be best described as “emergency 
remote education” (Bozkurt, et  al., 2020). To avoid an escalated risk from the 
degeneration of distance education to emergency remote education, a reflection 
of the basic values that established the Distance Education field is needed.
The impact of Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK) and Educational 
Data Mining (EDM) in the Distance Education field is crucial because they can 
offer solid proof based on the plethora of data created by the online educational 
activity. There is a large number of analytical methods that can be applied to 
this data such as social network analysis, sentiment analysis, influence analysis, 
discourse analysis, classification, clustering, Bayesian modeling, relationship 
mining, and discovery with models (Siemens & Baker, 2012), and even larger 
number of tools that offer an implementation of such methods. Driven by this 
notion that “learning analytics is about learning. As such, the computational 
aspects of learning analytics must be well integrated within the existing educa-
tional research” (Gašević et al., 2015), we adopt a three-layered learning analyt-
ics methodology that is immersed into our educational research of investigating 
traits of students that facilitate learning in a distance education scenario. Hence, 
we propose a sequence of methodological steps aiming to lead to a better under -
standing of a distant students’ community. Several data sources were combined to 
mine primitive variables concerning students’ academic performance and social 
interaction.
3530 Education and Information Technologies (2022) 27:3529–3565

===== s10639-025-13614-5.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 30
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:21427–21456
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-025-13614-5
Abstract
The rapid expansion of e-learning has resulted in a surge in educational data vol -
ume, presenting challenges in manually uncovering valuable information. Concur -
rently, advancements in educational data mining offer robust technical support for 
forecasting student performance based on their engagement behaviors. In this study, 
we initially investigate the efficacy of machine learning algorithms for forecasting 
student performance, followed by an exploration of the application of deep learning 
techniques in this domain. This research proposes the utilization of a Large-scale 
Feature-Derived Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory Neural Network (LFD-
BiLSTM) model for predicting student performance. We analyze students’ learning 
behaviors using clickstream data extracted from virtual learning environments and 
investigate the primary factors influencing academic achievement. The results in -
dicate that the model achieves a high accuracy of 92.57%, a recall rate of 93.90%, 
and an F1 score of 92.96%. Furthermore, the experimental findings underscore the 
significant influence of students’ learning behavior, educational level, and the Index 
of Multiple Deprivation on their academic performance, providing valuable insights 
for educators, policymakers, and researchers to tailor individualized programs.
Keywords Academic performance prediction · BiLSTM · Learning engagement · 
Educational data mining · Feature derivation
Received: 8 June 2024 / Accepted: 12 May 2025 / Published online: 22 May 2025
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2025
An in-depth exploration of predictive analytics in academic 
performance: a comprehensive framework utilizing 
large-scale feature-derived bidirectional long short-term 
memory neural networks
Wenyu Yang1,2 · Bozhi Yang2 · Yunqian Wang1
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
1 3
Education and Information Technologies (2025) 30:21427–21456
1 Introduction
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) have emerged as a viable alternative to con-
ventional classroom education, granting students access to high-caliber educational 
resources and enabling participation in diverse learning experiences. Nevertheless, 
empirical studies have demonstrated that online learning, compared to face-to-face 
classroom teaching, tends to result in lower academic performance and higher failure 
rates (Hone & El Said, 2016; Xing et al., 2019). Predicting student academic perfor-
mance at an early stage is crucial for understanding the effectiveness of future inter-
ventions. It helps identify at-risk students or those requiring additional support and 
allows for differentiated instruction based on individual needs and progress, avoiding 
the inefficiencies of “scattergun” interventions (Brooman & Darwent, 2014). This 
method empowers educational administrators to adopt a proactive stance, facilitat -
ing continuous and frequent monitoring of student characteristics and progress. This 
exposes students’ needs and creates opportunities to build personalized learning 
environments.
In the post-COVID-19 era, educational institutions have reevaluated their digital 
devices and network infrastructure to establish effective learning environments and 
enhance student participation in online education. Previous research has underscored 
the importance of directly integrating the concept of student participation as a crucial 
predictor of academic achievement. Student engagement is the expression of student 
motivation and the extent of active involvement in academic activities (Connell & 
Wellborn, 1991). Participation is often conceptualized as a multidimensional con -
struct. Dixson (2015) noted that engagement is composed of an individual’s thoughts, 
attitudes, behaviors, and interactive data. Latif and Miles ( 2013) found that, when 
controlling for student ability and effort, there is an independent correlation between 
attendance and academic performance. Previous studies have used student perfor -
mance as a dependent variable and attendance as an independent variable to statisti -
cally analyze the relationship between the two (Ha et al., 2024). However, Andrietti 
and Velasco (2015) and Arulampalam et al. ( 2012) indicated that this impact is not 
statistically significant. This study aims to investigate the correlation between stu -
dents’ behavioral engagement and academic achievement by using data mining tech-
niques to analyze the data of students’ interactions with the virtual learning system.
Educational Data Mining (EDM) based on techniques such as deep learning (DL) 
and machine learning (ML), often employs methods including clustering, regression, 
association rules, and classification to mine and analyze frontline data from edu -
cational systems (Keser & Aghalarova, 2022), to forecast the enrollment decisions 
and student performance of students. For instance, Waheed et al. ( 2020) collected 
transcript data from students in the same department at a university in China and con-
structed models for Random Forest (RF), Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT), 
and Decision Tree (DT), and study demonstrated that the RF model could success -
fully identify over 80% of learners at risk of underachievement.
However, previous studies have predominantly focused on using individual static 
features to forecast student performance, but have tended to overlook the actual 
value and importance of student engagement in the Virtual Learning Environment 
(VLE). Additionally, past studies have typically relied on existing feature data, fail -
1 3
21428

===== s10648-025-10011-9.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Self-regulated Learning in the Digitally Enhanced Science Classroom: Toward an Early Warning System
AUTHOR_META: Marcus Kubsch 
PAGES: 38
Vol.:(0123456789)
Educational Psychology Review (2025) 37:34
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-025-10011-9
INTERVENTION STUDY
Self‑regulated Learning in the Digitally Enhanced Science 
Classroom: Toward an Early Warning System
Marcus Kubsch1  · Sebastian Strauß2  · Adrian Grimm3  · 
Sebastian Gombert4  · Hendrik Drachsler4  · Knut Neumann3 · 
Nikol Rummel2 
Accepted: 14 March 2025 / Published online: 8 April 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Recent research underscores the importance of inquiry learning for effective sci-
ence education. Inquiry learning involves self-regulated learning (SRL), for exam-
ple when students conduct investigations. Teachers face challenges in orchestrating 
and tracking student learning in such instruction; making it hard to adequately sup-
port students. Using AI methods such as machine learning (ML), the data that is 
generated when students interact in technology-enhanced classrooms can be used 
to track their learning and subsequently to inform teachers so that they can better 
support student learning. This study implemented digital workbooks in an inquiry-
based physics unit, collecting cognitive, metacognitive, and affective data from 214 
students. Using ML methods, an early warning system was developed to predict 
students’ learning outcomes. Explainable ML methods were used to unpack these 
predictions and analyses were conducted for potential biases. Results indicate that 
an integration of cognitive, metacognitive, and affective data can predict students’ 
productivity with an accuracy ranging from 60 to 100% as the unit progresses. Ini-
tially, affective and metacognitive variables dominate predictions, with cognitive 
variables becoming more significant later. Using only affective and metacognitive 
data, predictive accuracies ranged from 60 to 80% throughout. Bias was found to be 
highly dependent on the ML methods being used. The study highlights the poten-
tial of digital student workbooks to support SRL in inquiry-based science educa-
tion, guiding future research and development to enhance instructional feedback and 
teacher insights into student engagement. Further, the study sheds new light on the 
data needed and the methodological challenges when using ML methods to investi-
gate SRL processes in classrooms.
Keywords Self-regulated learning · Machine learning · Technology-enhanced 
classroom · Early warning system
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
 Educational Psychology Review (2025) 37:34
34 Page 2 of 38
Recent approaches to science teaching involve inquiry-based instruction where 
students take the role of a scientist to explore a phenomenon by engaging in sci-
entific practices such as developing and testing hypotheses (Pedaste et  al., 2015). 
Inquiry instruction affords learners with many degrees of freedom and allows them 
to investigate a problem in their own way. Thus, the inquiry process requires stu-
dents to become active and regulate their learning which is usually challenging for 
them (Schraw et  al., 2006). It is therefore important that teachers notice learners 
who struggle with self-regulation and provide them with adequate support early in 
the inquiry process. Technology-enhanced learning environments have the potential 
to support teachers in monitoring their students’ inquiry and understanding by col-
lecting data about cognitive, affective, motivational, and metacognitive processes of 
self-regulation during learning (CAMM processes; Molenaar et al., 2023). Machine 
learning (ML) techniques can leverage such data and use them to predict students’ 
learning performance, which holds the potential to develop early warning systems 
for teachers (Macfadyen & Dawson, 2010). Such early warning systems, in turn, can 
support teachers in making decisions about providing adaptive support to students.
Ample research has provided insights into how CAMM processes during self-
regulation of learning relate to learning outcomes (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2022; Saint 
et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2023). However, the relevance of the different processes and 
to what extent the insights from this body of work can guide the development of 
early warning systems for real-life classrooms 1 remains an open question because 
previous studies typically drew on data from laboratory, or otherwise well-con-
trolled data collections over relatively short periods of time. While collecting data 
in such settings has its merits, for example, they allow collecting multimodal data 
streams—often including sensor data (e.g., Azevedo et  al., 2022; Molenaar et  al., 
2023; Winne, 2017b)—it also has its challenges. Laboratory and laboratory-like set-
tings do not reflect the affordances of data collections in real-life classrooms, such 
as having to find a balance between collecting data unobtrusively and collecting data 
that represents objective, reliable, and valid operationalizations of the constructs of 
interest, as well as collecting data in a time and effort efficient manner (i.e., eco-
nomical), and considering legal and ethical bounds that are in place to protect stu-
dents’ privacy. Furthermore, it is challenging to collect data on SRL processes and 
learning outcomes that unfold during inquiry learning over weeks or even months of 
instruction. Against this background, there is a need to better understand how differ-
ent CAMM processes can be modelled and used to predict learning outcomes, when 
represented by data that is collected under the affordances of the criteria for data 
collection in classrooms outlined above.
The present study aims to address this need with a secondary analysis of data 
that was collected in middle school physics classrooms as part of a research pro-
ject. This data set encompassed data on the cognitive, affective, and metacogni-
tive processes (CAM) of learning in the classroom, while data on students’ moti-
vation was not available. With the present analysis, we address the methodological 
1 With “real-life classroom” we refer to classrooms that are typical for instruction in schools, i.e., class-
rooms where traditional face-to-face settings are the norm.

===== s10994-023-06336-7.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Classifier calibration: a survey on how to assess and improve predicted class probabilities
AUTHOR_META: Telmo Silva Filho 
PAGES: 50
Vol.:(0123456789)
Machine Learning (2023) 112:3211–3260
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-023-06336-7
1 3
Classifier calibration: a survey on how to assess and improve 
predicted class probabilities
Telmo Silva Filho1,2  · Hao Song2  · Miquel Perello‑Nieto2  · 
Raul Santos‑Rodriguez2  · Meelis Kull3  · Peter Flach2 
Received: 5 January 2022 / Revised: 26 January 2023 / Accepted: 7 April 2023 /  
Published online: 16 May 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
This paper provides both an introduction to and a detailed overview of the principles and 
practice of classifier calibration. A well-calibrated classifier correctly quantifies the level of 
uncertainty or confidence associated with its instance-wise predictions. This is essential for 
critical applications, optimal decision making, cost-sensitive classification, and for some 
types of context change. Calibration research has a rich history which predates the birth of 
machine learning as an academic field by decades. However, a recent increase in the inter -
est on calibration has led to new methods and the extension from binary to the multiclass 
setting. The space of options and issues to consider is large, and navigating it requires the 
right set of concepts and tools. We provide both introductory material and up-to-date tech-
nical details of the main concepts and methods, including proper scoring rules and other 
evaluation metrics, visualisation approaches, a comprehensive account of post-hoc calibra-
tion methods for binary and multiclass classification, and several advanced topics.
Keywords Classification · Calibration · Confidence · Uncertainty · Multiclass · Evaluation
1  Introduction and motivation
A K-class probabilistic classifier is well-calibrated if among test instances receiving a pre-
dicted K-dimensional probability vector s , the class distribution is (approximately) distrib-
uted as s . This property is of fundamental importance when using a classifier for cost-
sensitive classification, for human decision making, or within an autonomous system. It 
means that the classifier correctly quantifies the level of uncertainty or confidence associ-
ated with its predictions. In a binary setting, scores given by a sufficiently calibrated classi-
fier can be simply thresholded to minimise expected misclassification cost. Thresholds can 
also be derived to optimally adapt to a change in class prior, or to a combination of both. In 
Editor: Eyke Hüllermeier.
Telmo Silva Filho, Hao Song and Miquel Perello-Nieto have contributed equally to this work.
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
3212 Machine Learning (2023) 112:3211–3260
1 3
contrast, for a poorly calibrated classifier the optimal thresholds cannot be obtained with-
out optimisation.
Many machine learning algorithms are known to produce over-confident models, unless 
dedicated procedures are applied during training. The goal of (post-hoc) calibration meth-
ods is to use hold-out validation data to learn a calibration map for a previously trained 
model that transforms the model’s predictions to be better calibrated. Many calibration 
methods for binary classifiers have been introduced, including logistic calibration (also 
known as ‘Platt scaling’), various binning methods including isotonic calibration (also 
known as the ROC convex hull method), as well as more recent methods including beta 
calibration and Bayesian methods.
When we have more than two classes, calibration is generally more involved, as is often 
the case with multiclass classification. Multiclass calibration has mostly been approached 
by decomposing the problem into K one-vs-rest binary calibration tasks, one for each class. 
The predictions of these K calibration models form unnormalised probability vectors, 
which, after normalisation, may not be calibrated in a multiclass sense. Native multiclass 
calibration methods were introduced recently focusing on neural networks. These methods 
constitute various multiclass extensions of Platt scaling, adding a calibration layer between 
the logits of the neural network and the softmax layer.
The literature on post-hoc classifier calibration in machine learning is now sufficiently 
rich that it is no longer straightforward to obtain or maintain a good overview of the area, 
which was the main motivation for writing this survey. It grew out of a tutorial we pre-
sented at the 2020 European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice 
of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (see https:// class ifier- calib ration. github. io). Our aim 
then and now is to provide both introductory material and up-to-date technical details of 
the main concepts and methods. Our focus is on the classical setup where the classifier is 
deployed in the same setting where it was calibrated, except for potential changes in class 
prior or misclassification costs. We do not cover methods to achieve robustness under con-
ditions of other distributional shifts or out-of-distribution inputs (Ovadia et al., 2019). We 
try to do justice to historical developments and pay attention to important topics that are 
not as widely known as they deserve to be, such as proper scoring rules.
We also try to identify and clarify possible sources for confusion. The multiclass set-
ting in particular introduces numerous subtleties that have not always been recognised or 
correctly dealt with in previous work. For example, some authors use the weaker notion of 
confidence calibration, which requires only that the classifier’s predicted probability for 
what it considers the most likely class is calibrated. While this is perfectly valid in its own 
right, it isn’t always appreciated by subsequent authors that this is a much weaker notion 
of calibration than the one defined informally in the first sentence of this survey. One can 
also observe variations in the evaluation metric used and in the way calibrated probabilities 
are visualised. Our main aim in this survey is hence to provide a unified perspective on the 
different methods and metrics for binary and multiclass calibration, giving each variation 
its proper place.
For the purpose of this survey we have developed a Python library which includes 
most of the functionalities presented in the following sections. PyCalib  1 implements sev-
eral calibration metrics (eg. confidence and classwise ECE, and their MCE counterparts), 
1 https:// class ifier- calib ration. github. io/ PyCal ib/.

===== s11135-026-02699-w.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 32
Received: 26 January 2026 / Accepted: 7 March 2026 / Published Online: 02 April 2026 /  
Published online: 24 March 2026
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2026, modified publication 2026
  Faisal Alshammari
f.alshammari@mu.edu.sa
1 Department of educational sciences, College of education, Majmaah University, AI-Majmaah, 
11952, Saudi Arabia
Pedagogical transformation through generative AI: a hybrid 
deep learning comparison with traditional digital learning 
materials based on GenAI-EduNet framework
Faisal Alshammari1
Quality & Quantity (2026) 60:10855–10886
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-026-02699-w
Abstract
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) tools have transformed higher education, yet 
empirical comparisons with traditional digital resources remain limited. This study pro -
poses GenAI-EduNet, a hybrid deep learning architecture integrating Long Short-Term 
Memory networks and multi-head self-attention transformers to predict and analyze learn -
ing outcomes when students use GenAI tools, specifically Google NotebookLM, versus 
conventional digital materials. The research adopts a rigorous quasi-experimental quan -
titative design involving 1847 undergraduate students across two academic semesters, 
with model training and validation using the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset 
(OULAD) and EdNet. GenAI-EduNet introduces several innovations: a multimodal en -
gagement encoding mechanism with gated attention capturing behavioral, cognitive, and 
affective dimensions; an adaptive knowledge tracing module based on transformer at -
tention for modeling temporal learning patterns; a dual-branch comparative performance 
predictor employing inverse propensity weighting for causal inference; and a binary out -
come module for pass–fail prediction. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed 
framework achieves 94.7% classification accuracy and an AUC of 0.967, outperforming 
ten state-of-the-art baselines by 8.3%. Quasi-experimental analyses reveal that students 
using NotebookLM achieved significantly higher learning gains, including post-test scores 
(d = 0.73, p < .001), higher-order thinking skills (d = 0.74, p < .001), cognitive engagement 
(d = 0.59, p < .001), and self-efficacy (d = 0.52, p < .001). Overall, the findings highlight 
the pedagogical value of integrating source-grounded generative AI tools, specifically 
NotebookLM in higher education and contribute a validated computational framework to 
learning analytics research in the era of artificial intelligence, supporting evidence-based 
policy development, curriculum redesign, faculty training, and sustainable digital trans -
formation worldwide.
1 3
F . Alshammari
Keywords Generative AI · Higher education · Learning analytics · Deep learning · 
Knowledge tracing · Educational technology
Abbreviations
D   Complete dataset
xi   Learning interaction sequence for student i
yi   Binary learning outcome (pass/fail)
ci   Learning condition indicator (0: traditional, 1: GenAI)
ei,t   Learning event at time t for student i
Ti   Sequence length for student i
bi,t   Behavioral feature vector
ci,t   Cognitive feature vector
ai,t   Affective feature vector
h(l)
i,t    Hidden state at layer l
ki,t   Knowledge state at time t
d   Hidden dimension
dk    Key dimension for attention
τi   Individual Treatment Effect
πi   Propensity score
λ 1,λ 2   Loss weight hyperparameters
η   Learning rate
Abbreviations
GenAI  Generative artificial intelligence
LLM  Large language model
LSTM  Long short-term memory
OULAD  Open university learning analytics dataset
ATE  Average treatment effect
ITE  Individual treatment effect
IPW  Inverse propensity weighting
DKT  Deep knowledge tracing
SAKT  Self-attentive knowledge tracing
AKT  Attentive knowledge tracing
VLE  Virtual learning environment
LMS  Learning management system
1 Introduction
The dawn of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) technologies has dramatically 
reshaped the educational field setting, offering previously unheard-of customizable learning 
experiences through the introduction of significant concerns about their relative effective -
ness when compared to more time-tested digital learning resources (Palalas et al. 2025, 
Alghazo et al. 2025). The need to systematically assess the effects of AI-driven technologi-
cal applications like Google NotebookLM, ChatGPT and Claude on learning outcomes has 
1 3
10856

===== s11277-023-10838-x.pdf =====
TITLE_META: A Systematic Review on Predicting the Performance of Students in Higher Education in Offline Mode Using Machine Learning Techniques
AUTHOR_META: Rahul
PAGES: 32
Vol.:(0123456789)
Wireless Personal Communications (2023) 133:1643–1674
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-023-10838-x
1 3
A Systematic Review on Predicting the Performance 
of Students in Higher Education in Offline Mode Using 
Machine Learning Techniques
Rahul1 · Rahul Katarya1
Accepted: 21 December 2023 / Published online: 26 January 2024 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2024
Abstract
For scholarly organizations, students’ academic performance (AP) computes student 
achievements in different academic subjects. Therefore, a systematic literature review 
based on machine learning approaches to improve student performance is proposed. This 
field creates a way to discover hidden examples from instructive information. Machine 
learning (ML) techniques are used for performance prediction. It is become a challenge 
due to its imbalanced dataset. This review aims to identify the best proposals that focus 
on various ML methods used for the performance analysis of students. This review will 
become helpful to the teachers in identifying the weak students, and it helps to improve 
their performance through proper guidance. Thus, it reflects in the student’s background 
and boosts their growth. It also brings benefits to students, teachers, and institutions. This 
study focused on applying machine learning techniques to predict students’ performance 
in recent times. With a systematic approach, the research identified the existing predic-
tion methods and tools used to predict students’ performance and observed the researchers’ 
type of variables in this research area. In this study, almost more than 100 papers were 
analyzed to reveal various modern techniques that are commonly used to predict student 
performance and the goals they need to achieve in this field. The results from the vari-
ous research will help improve students’ academics and monitor the student’s performance, 
which would also improve their literacy rate.
Keywords Educational data mining · Student performance prediction · Classification · 
Regression · Clustering
1 Introduction
Today, ML techniques, Artificial Intelligence, and automation are increasing in every 
sector. The growth of these concepts can be realized from the fact that robots used to be 
defined only by a mechanical arm and have now moved to teach pendant techniques and 
 * Rahul 
 rahulzhere023@gmail.com
1 Big Data Analytics and Web Intelligence Laboratory, Department of Computer Science 
and Engineering, Delhi Technological University, New Delhi, Delhi 110042, India
1644 Rahul, R. Katarya 
1 3
even programmable robots. Education Mining has been used in much work to enhance per-
formance prediction. This field creates a way to discover hidden examples from instructive 
information. This technique is used in the educational system to analyze the performance 
of students (POS) to create a development in the educational system. This paper tried to 
analyze the techniques performed in analyzing the POS. This review helps to identify the 
result of some basic questions. India currently spends less than 5% of its Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) on Education, while countries like Denmark spend nearly 9% of their GDP. 
Therefore, the usage of technology in the education system is more important. Informa-
tion technology is used to analyze POS to identify the students with poor performance and 
the teachers and professors trying to improve their scores. Since the volume of research is 
enlarging day by day, it can be challenging for research scholars to find and analyze the 
studies of POS based on ML algorithms.
An important way to contribute to the scientific community is to support practitioners 
by using ML methods to study/track student performance (SP) to provide the foundations 
for acquiring key concepts and works in state-of-the-art research. The techniques removed 
from the Educational Data Mining (EDM) regulation [1] have been used to understand 
students, including their learning behavior, and predict their academic presentation based 
on various student-related attributes such as demographic, academic and external details. 
The results of this learning identify an explanatory structure that unifies multiple dimen-
sions to make the prediction convincing. The ML models outperform current predictable 
approaches. More effort is expected to produce well-formulated and generalizable results. 
ML techniques are the most extensive way to analyze the POS. This review article aims 
at showcasing a detailed SLR of students’ performance prediction. Different techniques 
involve studies such as Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference Systems (ANFIS), Artificial Neu-
ral Networks (ANN), and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). In the context of studying 
POS, ML techniques are used to provide instructors with better tips for constructing pow -
erful ML models. About 109 studies were considered, and other relevant works from other 
sources were also considered. It might be observed that many articles included more than 
one ML Technique. In many cases, datasets do not contain only the performance in exams 
but also the performance of the quizzes and assignments [2].
The various ML algorithms are classified into supervised ML (SML) and Unsupervised 
ML (UML). SML can be further categorized into Classification and Regression, and UML 
can be further categorized into Clustering. Classification algorithms can be Support Vector 
Machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), K Nearest Neighbour (KNN), and Neural Networks 
(NN). Regression Algorithms can be Logistic Regression (LR) and Decision Tree (DT). 
Clustering can be classified into K-means, Hierarchical, and Fuzzy C-means. Various clas-
sification algorithms classify the target variable [3]. Attributes considered for these studies 
include Academic achievements during preclinical, school Data, Internal marks, Sessional 
Marks, Admission scores, CGPA, Online questionnaire filled out by students themselves, 
Student Images, Course Difficulty, External Assessment, Average National Exam Score, 
School Attended or not, Socio-Demographic Academic Variables, Personal life details and 
much more.
The grades in these studies are predicted through various parameters like their Gradu-
ate Results, Graduate Degree, and past results. Some datasets also include Registration 
Number, Program, Duration, Program Code, Gender, Address, etc. [4]. Early prediction 
of student performance in the right fashion will improve student retention and the testing 
methods used for students. This practice will also aid educators and education policymak -
ers by giving them better information about their student’s learning abilities and how best 
they can help students.

===== s11412-023-09385-1.pdf =====
TITLE_META: The temporal dynamics of online problem-based learning: Why and when sequence matters
AUTHOR_META:  Mohammed Saqr
PAGES: 27
Vol.:(0123456789)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-023-09385-1
1 3
The temporal dynamics of online problem‑based learning: 
Why and when sequence matters
Mohammed Saqr1  · Sonsoles López‑Pernas1,2
Received: 5 August 2022 / Accepted: 8 December 2022 / 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Early research on online PBL explored student satisfaction, effectiveness, and design. 
The temporal aspect of online PBL has rarely been addressed. Thus, a gap exists in our 
knowledge regarding how online PBL unfolds: when and for how long a group engages 
in collaborative discussions. Similarly, little is known about whether and what sequence 
of interactions could predict higher achievement. This study aims to bridge such a 
gap by implementing the latest advances in temporal learning analytics to analyze the 
sequential and temporal aspects of online PBL across a large sample ( n = 204 students) 
of qualitatively coded interactions (8,009 interactions). We analyzed interactions at the 
group level to understand the group dynamics across whole problem discussions, and at the 
student level to understand the students’ contribution dynamics across different episodes. 
We followed such analyses by examining the association of interaction types and the 
sequences thereof with students’ performance using multilevel linear regression models. 
The analysis of the interactions reflected that the scripted PBL process is followed a logical 
sequence, yet often lacked enough depth. When cognitive interactions (e.g., arguments, 
questions, and evaluations) occurred, they kindled high cognitive interactions, when low 
cognitive and social interactions dominated, they kindled low cognitive interactions. The 
order and sequence of interactions were more predictive of performance, and with a higher 
explanatory power as compared to frequencies. Starting or initiating interactions (even 
with low cognitive content) showed the highest association with performance, pointing to 
the importance of initiative and sequencing.
Keywords Learning analytics · Sequence mining · Process mining · CSCL · Problem-based 
learning
 * Mohammed Saqr 
 mohammed.saqr@uef.fi
1 Departamento de Sistemas Informáticos, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, ETSI Sistemas 
Informáticos, c/ Alan Turing s/n, 28031 Madrid, Spain
2 School of Computing, University of Eastern Finland, Joensuu Campus, Yliopistokatu 2, 
fi-80100 Joensuu, F inland
Published online: 10 March 2023
Intern. J. Comput.-Support. Collab. Learn (2023) 18:11–37
1 3
Introduction
Problem-based learning (PBL) is a student-centered collaborative learning approach that 
relies on engaging students in stimulating real-life situations (problems). The fundamental 
philosophy of PBL revolves around students working in small groups to tackle an ill-struc-
tured real-life problem with the help of a teacher (Albanese & Dast, 2014). The intention 
behind PBL has always been to stimulate students to take an active and deep approach to 
learning, enhance self-directedness, and embolden problem-solving skills (Dolmans et al., 
2016; Yew et al., 2011). By doing so, PBL —arguably— has the potential to equip students 
with the skills needed for their future learning and professional continuous education (Car 
et al., 2019; Dolmans, 2019; Gewurtz et al., 2016). Whereas PBL originated at the Health 
Sciences Center at McMaster University over five decades ago, the approach has spread 
across several disciplines and educational levels (Servant-Miklos et al., 2019).
The large-scale adoption of PBL across universities and schools has resulted in a diverse 
range of implementations, traditions, and a wealth of research (Servant-Miklos et al., 2019). 
Such research has studied face-to-face and online PBL with methods that include surveys, 
interviews, qualitative, and quantitative analysis of interaction transcripts (Car et  al., 2019; 
Dolmans et al., 2005; Servant-Miklos et al., 2019; Ünal, 2019; Yew & Goh, 2016). Nonethe-
less, existing research has mainly relied on counts of interactions or interaction types with less 
attention to temporality. As a learning process, PBL unfolds in time, where the sequence of 
students’ interactions could influence each other, stimulate, or curb productive collaboration 
(Sobocinski et al., 2017; Visschers-Pleijers et al., 2006). Given the importance of temporality 
and the paucity of existing temporal PBL research, our study takes a process-oriented approach 
to bridge such a gap. We take advantage of the latest advances in temporal analytic methods to 
explore the process of students’ interactions in online PBL. We study the sequential patterns 
of interactions and how they unfold over time, find which sequences are associated with better 
performance, and determine whether sequences are more predictive of a higher performance 
as compared to frequencies (counts of codes).
The following sections of the introduction provide a concise background on online PBL, 
the dynamic PBL process, and the temporal methods implemented in our paper. We then 
review the theoretical underpinnings of PBL, which grounds our research as well as the 
related literature. The introduction concludes with a formulation of the motivation for our 
research and the specific research questions addressed in the remainder of the paper.
Online PBL
Online PBL —also referred to as e-PBL, technology-supported, technology-enhanced, 
digital, or blended PBL (the context of our study)— is a term that describes a PBL process 
where the internet is used as a medium to run the PBL process solely or partially (Car et al., 
2019). Interest has grown in online PBL with the advent of the internet, where a wide-
scale adoption of technology has been observed across the educational domain (Valtonen 
et al., 2022) and PBL was not an exception (e.g., Oliver & Omari, 1999). Several scholars 
sought to capitalize on the potential of computers in education, building on flagship 
examples in the field of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) that have been 
demonstrated to provide an environment for students in which to interact, exchange ideas, 
and collaboratively build knowledge in groups (Baker & Lund, 1997). CSCL offers students 
a platform where they can further develop their argumentation skills, improve their critical 
12 M. Saqr, S. López-Pernas

===== s12528-022-09324-3.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 20
Journal of Computing in Higher Education (2023) 35:371–390
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12528-022-09324-3
1 3
Abstract
This paper presents an analysis of learning analytics practices which aimed to 
achieve personalised learning. It addresses the need for a systematic analysis of the 
increasing amount of practices of learning analytics which are targeted at person -
alised learning. The paper summarises and highlights the characteristics and trends 
in relevant learning analytics practices, and illustrates their relationship with per -
sonalised learning. The analysis covers 144 related articles published between 2012 
and 2019 collected from Scopus. The learning analytics practices were analysed 
from the dimensions of what (learning context, learning environment, and data col -
lected), who (stakeholder), why (objective of learning analytics, and personalised 
learning goal), and how (learning analytics method), as well as their outcomes and 
limitations. The results show the diversified contexts of learning analytics, with 
the major ones being tertiary education and online learning. The types of data for 
learning analytics, which have been increasingly collected from online and emerg -
ing learning environments, are mainly related to the learning activities, academic 
performance, educational background and learning outcomes. The most frequent 
types of learning analytics objectives and personalised learning goals are enhancing 
learning experience, providing personal recommendations and satisfying personal 
learning needs. The learning analytics methods have commonly involved the use of 
statistical tests, classification, clustering and visualisation techniques. The findings 
also suggest the areas for future work to address the limitations revealed in the 
practices, such as investigating more cost-effective ways of offering personalised 
support, and the transforming role of teachers in personalised learning practices.
Keywords Learning analytics · Personalised learning · Personalised education · 
Personalisation · Educational technology
Accepted: 22 April 2022 / Published online: 4 June 2022
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2022
An analysis of learning analytics in personalised learning
Billy Tak-ming Wong1 · Kam Cheong Li1 · Simon K.S. Cheung1
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
B. T.-m. Wong et al.
1 3
Introduction
The utilisation of educational data to advance learning and teaching has become a 
rapidly growing area in the past decade. Known as “learning analytics”, it refers 
to “the measurement, collection, analysis and reporting of data about learners and 
their contexts, for purposes of understanding and optimising learning and the envi -
ronments in which it occurs” (Siemens & Gašević, 2012, p. 1). Learning analytics 
enables different stakeholders to contextualise the invisible data out of the sea of 
educational data and improve students’ learning experience and performance based 
on the insights gained from the data analysis. Its development and prevalence have 
been shown in a broad range of educational institutions (Li et al., 2018a, b; Piety & 
Pea, 2018; Wong 2017; Wong et al., 2018) as well as subject disciplines (Li & Wong, 
2020a).
Personalised learning is an emerging area in which its development has been pro-
moted by the advances in learning analytics. It is conceptualised as “tailoring learn -
ing for each student’s strengths, needs and interests — including enabling students’ 
voices and choices in what, how, when and where they learn — to provide flexibility 
and supports to ensure mastery of the highest standards possible” (Patrick et al., 
2013, p. 4). Relevant work has covered the development of learning analytics or per-
sonalised learning, as well as the interaction of the two areas in relation to the use of 
specific technologies such as mobile devices (Baker & Inventado, 2014; Gabarre et 
al., 2018; Li & Wong, 2021). However, there is a literature gap in revealing how the 
use of learning analytics can help to achieve personalised learning.
Technologies incorporated with innovative pedagogical practices have made 
it possible for personalised learning to achieve its aims effectively and efficiently 
(Cheung et al., 2021). Learning analytics has driven personalised learning in many 
ways, such as instructors providing students with real-time feedback that is tailored 
to their individual learning progress (Arnold & Pistilli, 2012). For students, their 
personal profiles can be generated for recommendation of most appropriate materi -
als to fit their learning proficiency (Godwin-Jones, 2017). Also, students can access 
and analyse data related to their learning activities in various environments and con-
texts (Kalz, 2014). These initiatives have been shown to benefit learners in terms 
of increasing their engagement in learning, enhancing their learning experience and 
improving their learning outcomes. Despite the wide range of studies on and prac -
tices in learning analytics, those related to personalised learning have yet to be sys -
tematically summarised and analysed for their major patterns and trends.
To address the increasing importance of learning analytics in this area, this article 
presents an analysis of the relevant work to highlight the characteristics, patterns and 
trends of learning analytics practices which aimed to analyse personalised learning 
over the years. The analysis includes a total of 144 articles published between 2012 
and 2019 which report the use of learning analytics for personalisation of learning. 
It was conducted based on the Learning Analytics Reference Model (Chatti et al., 
2013), which covers the dimensions of what (data, contexts and environments), who 
(stakeholders), why (objectives), and how (methods). It also covers the outcomes 
and limitations of the relevant learning analytics practices in order to examine the 
potential future work in this area.
372

===== s12528-024-09397-2.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Online learners’ self-regulated learning skills regarding LMS interactions: a profiling study
AUTHOR_META: Ünal Çakiroğlu 
PAGES: 22
Vol:.(1234567890)
Journal of Computing in Higher Education (2024) 36:220–241
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12528-024-09397-2
1 3
Online learners’ self‑regulated learning skills regarding LMS 
interactions: a profiling study
Ünal Çakiroğlu 1  · Mehmet Kokoç2 · Melek Atabay1
Accepted: 19 January 2024 / Published online: 16 February 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
This profiling study deals with the self-regulated learning skills of online learners 
based on their interaction behaviors on the learning management system. The learn-
ers were profiled through their interaction behaviors via cluster analysis. Following 
a correlational model with the interaction data of learners, the post-test question-
naire data were used to determine self-regulated learning skills scores during the 
learning process. Regarding the scores, the clusters were named through the promi-
nent interactions of the learners yielding three clusters; actively engaged (Cluster1), 
assessment-oriented (Cluster2), and passively-oriented (Cluster3), respectively. The 
profiles in the clusters indicate that assessments were mostly used by the learners 
in Cluster2, while the frequency of the content tools was high in Cluster1. Surpris-
ingly, some tools such as glossary, survey, and chat did not play a prominent role 
in discriminating the clusters. Suggestions for future implementations of self-regu-
lated learning and effective online learning in learning management systems are also 
included.
Keywords Learning analytics · Online interactions · Self-regulated learning · 
Learning management systems
 * Ünal Çakiroğlu 
 cakiroglu@ktu.edu.tr
 Mehmet Kokoç 
 mehmetkokoc@trabzon.edu.tr
 Melek Atabay 
 melekatabay@trabzon.edu.tr
1 Computer Education and Instructional Department, Fatih Faculty of Education, Trabzon 
University, Söğütlü, Akçaabat, 61335 Trabzon, Turkey
2 School of Applied Sciences, Management Information Systems, Trabzon University, Trabzon, 
Turkey
221
1 3
Online learners’ self‑regulated learning skills regarding…
Introduction
Learners need to have more self-regulated learning (SRL) skills to be successful in 
online learning. However, understanding the actions, strategies, and goals of SRL is 
a more challenging task. Since learners have different abilities and knowledge, they 
employ different strategies through their SRL skills in online learning settings. Thus, 
increasing attention has been shown to online SRL over the last few years (Broad-
bent, 2017; Broadbent & Poon, 2015; Eggers et al., 2021). In the field of learning 
analytics (LA), recent techniques in LMSs provide possibilities to understand self-
regulation in online learning. Using LA techniques, researchers are still studying 
how to reveal or measure SRL in online settings. The studies are ongoing answering 
the questions of what to trace, how to collect data, and what kind of techniques are 
useful for revealing SRL (Viberg et al., 2020). For example, some LA studies ana-
lyze online interaction behaviors and create indicators of SRL phases from learners’ 
trace data (Kia et al., 2021).
In recent years, attention has been focused on grouping learners having similar 
interaction behaviors in LMSs. These studies are limited in number and use interac-
tion data (Sun et al., 2023) to analyze some variables among these groups (eg. learn-
ing performance). Although some of the research reported some information about 
the groups’ SRL behaviors, studies explaining these behaviors covering interactions 
with LMS tools are still nascent. Thus, this study highlights the importance of the 
use of LMS tools and associating the tools with groups’ SRL behaviors. The present 
study grouped learners’ regarding Zimmerman’s (2000) three-phase model and cap-
tured their interaction behaviors with LMS tools.
Theoretical background
Many studies have captured online SRL behaviors (Ye & Pennisi, 2022) and per -
ceived online SRL strategies (Sun et al., 2018) by applying appropriate SRL models. 
Some SRL models focus on specific dimensions such as emotions and motivation 
(Boekaerts, 2011), on cognition (Winne & Hadwin, 1998) and some others focus on 
specific contexts such as collaborative learning (Jarvela & Hadwin, 2013). In addi-
tion, Pintrich’s (2000) model focuses on the role of cognition and metacognition 
processes and learning behaviors through resource management. Despite the differ -
ent conceptualizations in the models, the SRL is generally considered a temporal 
dynamic process that covers planning and forethought, performance and monitoring, 
and reflection and evaluation phases (Alonso-Mencía et al., 2020; Saint et al., 2020; 
Zimmerman, 2000).
As one of the most cited SRL models, Zimmerman’s model (2000) described the 
SRL in three cyclical phases including forethought, performance, and self-reflection 
(Broadbent et al., 2020). In the forethought phase, learners analyze the task and set 
goals and plans accordingly. This phase is strengthened by several variables such as 
motivation, self-directed learning, and self-efficacy. It is useful to elaborate on this 
point by considering the relevant variables. Self-directed learning and self-efficacy 

===== s41239-023-00406-5.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Supporting students’ self-regulated learning in online learning using artificial intelligence applications
AUTHOR_META:  Sung-Hee Jin
PAGES: 21
Open Access
© The Author(s) 2023. Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits 
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third 
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the mate‑
rial. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// 
creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Jin et al. Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:37  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00406-5
International Journal of Educational
Technology in Higher Education
Supporting students’ self-regulated learning 
in online learning using artificial intelligence 
applications
Sung‑Hee Jin1, Kowoon Im1, Mina Yoo2, Ido Roll3 and Kyoungwon Seo4*   
Abstract 
Self‑regulated learning (SRL) is crucial for helping students attain high academic 
performance and achieve their learning objectives in the online learning context. 
However, learners often face challenges in properly applying SRL in online learning 
environments. Recent developments in artificial intelligence (AI) applications have 
shown promise in supporting learners’ self‑regulation in online learning by measuring 
and augmenting SRL, but research in this area is still in its early stages. The purpose of 
this study is to explore students’ perceptions of the use of AI applications to support 
SRL and to identify the pedagogical and psychological aspects that they perceive as 
necessary for effective utilization of those AI applications. To explore this, a speed dat‑
ing method using storyboards was employed as an exploratory design method. The 
study involved the development of 10 AI application storyboards to identify the phases 
and areas of SRL, and semi‑structured interviews were conducted with 16 university 
students from various majors. The results indicated that learners perceived AI applica‑
tions as useful for supporting metacognitive, cognitive, and behavioral regulation 
across different SRL areas, but not for regulating motivation. Next, regarding the use of 
AI applications to support SRL, learners requested consideration of three pedagogical 
and psychological aspects: learner identity, learner activeness, and learner position. 
The findings of this study offer practical implications for the design of AI applications in 
online learning, with the aim of supporting students’ SRL.
Keywords: Self‑regulated learning, Artificial intelligence, Online learning, Student 
perception
Introduction
Fully online or blended courses taught via online video have become increasingly prev -
alent in higher education. However, unlike face-to-face lectures where instructors can 
support learners in regulating their own learning, online learning environments often 
provide learners with high levels of autonomy and low levels of instructor presence 
(Jansen et al., 2020). Consequently, learners’ self-regulated learning (SRL) becomes criti-
cal to their academic success (Kizilcec et al., 2017). Unfortunately, many learners strug -
gle to self-regulate effectively in online learning (Greene & Azevedo, 2010; Jansen et al., 
2020), resulting in a deficiency in utilizing their SRL during online learning (Winne & 
*Correspondence:   
kwseo@seoultech.ac.kr
1 Division of Humanities 
and Liberal Arts, Hanbat National 
University, Daejeon, Korea
2 School of Lifelong Education, 
Kyungil University, Gyeongsan‑si, 
Gyeongsangbuk‑do, Korea
3 Faculty of Education in Science 
and Technology, Technion‑Israel 
Institute of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel
4 Department of Applied 
Artificial Intelligence, 
Seoul National University 
of Science and Technology, 
232 Gongneung‑ro, 
Gongneung‑dong, Nowon‑gu, 
Seoul 01811, Korea
Page 2 of 21Jin et al. Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:37 
Baker, 2013). Therefore, it is essential to support learners’ SRL in online learning envi -
ronments to enable them to achieve their learning goals effectively (Garcia et al., 2018).
External support using artificial intelligence (AI) could be a potential way of support -
ing learners’ successful SRL (Molenaar, 2022). However, supporting learners’ SRL is 
challenging as it comprises metacognitive, cognitive, behavioral and motivational pro -
cesses (Lodge et al., 2019), and is heavily influenced by contextual and personal factors. 
Therefore, one-size-fits-all approaches to SRL support are ineffective (Roll et al., 2014). 
The use of AI to support SRL should have two objectives: to assess and interpret learn -
ers’ SRL behaviors in online learning environments (Noroozi et al., 2019; Roll & Winne, 
2015) and to provide support that scaffolds these complex SRL processes. Various AI 
applications, such as AI plan organizers (Somasundaram et  al., 2020), AI companions 
(Woolf et  al., 2010), and AI agents (Goel & Polepeddi, 2016), have been developed to 
support learners’ SRL.
However, the learner’s SRL can be influenced by factors such as motivation (Kizil -
cec et al., 2017) and self-efficacy (Zimmerman, 2013), as well as teachers’ expertise and 
timely feedback. Given the significant impact of perceived teacher roles and learners’ 
characteristics on the success of SRL (Jouhari et al., 2015), it is crucial to consider these 
aspects when effectively supporting SRL using AI applications. Zawacki-Richter and his 
colleagues (2019) highlighted the need for more research on the pedagogical and psy -
chological considerations perceived by learners to effectively design AI applications in 
education. Similarly, Rosé and her colleagues (2019) emphasized the importance of pro -
viding interpretable and actionable insights into learners, rather than simply focusing 
on developing AI models that predict learners’ data more accurately. Additionally, it is 
important to comprehensively address potential issues learners may face when applying 
AI applications in real online learning environments, such as privacy violations, algo -
rithmic biases, and surveillance (Seo et al., 2021a , 2021b).
To develop effective AI applications that support SRL in the long term, it is necessary 
to investigate students’ perspectives on such applications (Jivet et  al., 2020). Students’ 
perceptions can serve as the basis for identifying pedagogical and psychological consid -
erations in the development AI applications. The aim of this study was to identify how 
students perceive the use of AI applications in supporting SRL, and to explore the ped -
agogical and psychologic

===== s42979-026-04919-4.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 16
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
SN Computer Science           (2026) 7:310 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-026-04919-4
individual with knowledge and skills for sustainable life -
long development [1].
Education is very important at the higher second -
ary school level, as it bridges classroom education with 
advanced academic or professional pathways because future 
opportunities are depending upon the quality of education 
received at this stage. Thus, achieving success at 10 + 2level 
is of extreme importance for both societal and individual 
growth. For this purpose, the early prediction of academic 
success has appeared as an acceptable approach for iden -
tifying students susceptible to lagging behind. Numerical 
association rule mining and analysis of exploratory data 
have been applied in relation to machine and deep learn -
ing approaches. The findings indicate the presence of a sig-
nificant level of correlation among the socio, economic and 
demographic parameters highlighting the fact that under -
standing the impact of one (or more) indicator on other 
related indicators with the objective to achieve students’ 
academic success [2].
Introduction
Education nourishes the students’ intellectual, social, and 
emotional perspectives and creates the roots for both indi -
vidual and societal development. The Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals (SDG 4) of the United Nations emphasizes the 
importance of education, which strives to ensure inclusive, 
equitable, and quality education for everyone and pro -
mote lifelong learning opportunities, empowering every 
  Minakshi Sharma
minakshimcaju@gmail.com;  
minakshisharma@jammuuniversity.ac.in
Vibhakar Mansotra
Vibhakar20@yahoo.co.in
1 Department of Computer Science and IT, University of 
Jammu, Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir 180006, India
Abstract
Education is vital to raising a generation that can lead a country to progress in all areas of life. The amalgamation and 
progression of machine learning, deep learning, and artificial neural networks allowed the development of models. Early 
performance prediction enables educators to effectively step in and assist students who are struggling or who might be at 
risk of falling behind and need additional support for academics. This study enables teachers an opportunity to transform 
their approach, identify areas to improve, and enhance student success significantly. Experiments were conducted using 
an OULAD (Open University Learning Analytics Dataset) from Kaggle, applying three machine learning models: Support 
Vector Machine (SVM), Categorical Boosting (CatBoost), Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), and Proposed Ensemble Model 
(PEM) using a soft voting approach. Among these models, our PEM emerged as the best performer and generalized 
effectively on the dataset, with accuracy rates of 96.83%. Therefore, it could potentially be stated that deeper and more 
optimized frameworks are more suitable for the task of classification of students’ grades. Based on the current study, deep 
learning can automate grades for early outcome prediction that helps educators, policymakers, and students who struggle 
in the moment. In addition, it increases academic success, identifies areas for improvement, and transforms teaching and 
learning.
Keywords Machine learning (ML) · Deep learning (DL) · data pre-processing · Performance metrics · ensemble 
methodology · SelectKBest features (a univariate statistical feature selection method) · Recursive feature elimination 
(RFE) · Principal component analysis (PCA) · Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) · Student academic success
Received: 4 January 2026 / Accepted: 17 March 2026
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2026
Blended Ensemble Intelligence for Academic Performance Prediction 
in Educational Datasets
Minakshi Sharma1  · Vibhakar Mansotra1
SN Computer Science

SN Computer Science           (2026) 7:310 
Considering the higher education (university level), the 
prediction and evaluation of educational goals consider a 
significant process that leads to achieving academic stan -
dards and improving education’s overall effectiveness. In 
addition, it allows the institutions to support individuals and 
students at risk at an early stage in a timely manner; this 
leads to better learning experiences and overall improve -
ment of educational efficacy [3]. Therefore, this study sug -
gests a novel strategy to classify students’ performance 
implementing our Proposed Ensemble Model (PEM). This 
approach utilizes the capabilities of deep learning (DL) 
and machine learning (ML) algorithms with integration to 
enhance classification performance. This allows educators 
and administrators to deploy an accurate machine learning 
and deep learning models to determine the students who 
need additional academic support.
To improve predictability, three classifiers: SVM, Cat 
Boost, and MLP models are utilized, each having unique 
capabilities to handle data and learning patterns. Our pro -
posed PEM lessens the limitations of individual base 
learners by integrating their complementary strengths and 
utilizing informative features to enhance overall predic -
tive performance. As a final estimator, its interpretability 
and efficiency help teachers gain insights about the factors 
contributing to students’ performance predictions. These 
outcomes will assist educators in taking preventive actions 
while improving existing teaching learning policies and 
ensuring the successful execution of improving grades, and 
subsequently helps to resolve issues related to poor results 
[3].
Novelty and Contributions
This study makes a methodological and application-driven 
contribution by proposing a lightweight and interpretable 
ensemble learning framework, termed PEM, for student 
performance forecasting at the University level. Unlike 
existing ensemble-based approaches that primarily rely 
on homogeneous tree-based or boosting models, the PEM 
framework integrates heterogeneous learners, namely SVM, 
CatBoost, and MLP, within a unified soft voting technique 
to take advantage of complementary learning behaviors for 
tabular educational data. In addition, this work provides an 
empirical evaluation on real educational data and demon -
strates improved robustness and predictive performance 
over individual baseline models. To the best of our com -
prehension, the present paper is one of the few research that 
systematically investigates such a heterogeneous ensemble 
configuration for early-stage student performance predic -
tion in the university education context.
Related Work
The ability of a country to survive and thrive hinges on its 
students’ academic performance. As a result, numerous edu-
cators are attempting to devise a numerous technique for 
preliminary forecasts of students’ academic achievement 
[4]. Numerous models have been suggested in the literature 
to predict academic success. One of the well-known fields 
of research within

===== s44163-025-00607-z.pdf =====
TITLE_META: 
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 33
RESEARCH Open Access
© The Author(s) 2025. Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International 
License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party 
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material 
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit  h t t p : /  / c r e a  t i v e c o  m m o n  s . o r g  / l i c e  n s 
e s / b  y - n c  - n d / 4 . 0 /.
Ma and Xiao Discover Artificial Intelligence            (2026) 6:33 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s44163-025-00607-z
*Correspondence:
Liu Xiao
liu_xiao55@outlook.com
1Faculty of Performance, Beijing 
City University, Beijing  
100083, China
2School of Humanities and 
Education, Guangzhou Institute 
of Science and Technology, 
Guangzhou 510540, Guangdong, 
China
Application of deep learning to the 
development of a prediction model for college 
students’ learning outcomes
Rui Ma1,2 and Liu Xiao1,2*
Discover Artificial Intelligence
Abstract
Student performance prediction is a central educational challenge, providing useful 
information for targeted academic support and intervention. Existing models do not 
work well in incorporating behavioral aspects like study habits and attendance into 
the models, despite the potential impact of these factors on academic outcomes. 
The present paper suggests a hybrid deep learning model for predicting college 
students’ learning outcomes based on incorporating academic, behavioral, and 
demographic information. Conventional student performance prediction models 
tend to concentrate on academic grades, tending to overlook behavioral aspects like 
study habits, attendance, and class participation. The suggested framework addresses 
this weakness by utilizing multiple data sources, offering a more comprehensive 
prediction of student performance. The architecture utilizes ResNet for hierarchical 
feature extraction, Autoencoders to reduce dimensions, and Long Short-Term 
Memory (LSTM) networks to select features, extracting both subtle patterns and 
temporal relationships in the data. Hyperparameters are optimized via the Cheetah 
Algorithm to improve model efficiency and reduce overfitting. Through the synthesis 
of these sophisticated methods, the architecture attains improved prediction 
precision, providing actionable insights into student success determinants. The 
suggested hybrid deep learning model obtained a high accuracy of 98.6%, precision 
of 98.2%, and recall of 97.4%, showing high potential to identify high and low-
performing students. The model was also effective in separating levels of student 
performance, as seen through its AUC-ROC score of 0.99, and accounted for 96% 
of variance in student scores with an R2 of 0.96. Moreover, the framework had low 
error predictions with an RMSE of 2.1 and MAE of 1.8, which clearly indicates that 
the framework is an extremely effective instrument for predicting the academic 
performance of students. This method offers a strong framework to predict student 
performance, with wider implications for early intervention and tailor-made academic 
interventions. It also highlights the benefit of incorporating behavior data into 
models of prediction in education.
Keywords Student performance, Study habits, Attendance, Deep learning, ResNet,, 
LSTM

Page 2 of 33
Ma and Xiao Discover Artificial Intelligence            (2026) 6:33 
1 Introduction
Prediction of student performance has become very important in education due to the 
fact that it provides teachers with crucial information on how to offer timely and spe -
cific interventions [ 1– 3]. Determining students at risk for potential underachievement 
or school dropout allows educational institutions to focus their resources and build aca -
demic success [ 4]. Historically, performance has been predicted with limited informa -
tion such as grades and test scores, but emerging research shows that behavior data such 
as class participation, attendance, and study habits are critical in making accurate pre -
dictions [5, 6]. Including these in prediction models not only increases accuracy but also 
helps in identifying early warning signs that may otherwise be missed. Such an approach 
has the potential to enhance teaching practices, reduce drop-out rates, and equip stu -
dents with the necessary support to excel [ 7– 9]. The model proposed here is designed 
to fill this gap by bringing together diverse data sources, offering a complete picture of 
the reasons behind student success and failure. By integrating academic records, behav -
ioral traits, and population traits, the model generalizes its method and makes it more 
dependable in forecasting students’ examination outcomes.
State-of-the-art student performance prediction techniques primarily employ tra -
ditional machine learning algorithms, such as decision trees, support vector machines 
(SVM), and ensemble models such as random forests [ 10– 12]. Some models, for 
instance, deep learning models such as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) and recurrent 
neural networks (RNNs), have been utilized here too. Though promising, the majority 
of these models suffer serious disadvantages [ 13– 15]. For example, decision trees and 
SVMs are not good at handling high-dimensional data and will not necessarily be able 
to capture subtle, non-linear relationships [ 16– 18]. Additionally, traditional methods 
don’t typically account for temporal dependencies, e.g., how prior performance or study 
habits influence subsequent performance [ 19, 20]. Finally, models like random forests 
can suffer from overfitting when working with noisy and heterogeneous datasets. The 
inability of most present models to capture behavioral and temporal factors limits their 
predictive potential, necessitating more advanced, holistic methodologies.
The suggested framework corrects these limitations by incorporating advanced deep 
learning methods that are capable of processing high-dimensional and complex data. By 
employing ResNet for feature extraction, Autoencoders (AE) for reducing dimensions, 
and LSTM for selecting features, the framework avoids the limitations of previous mod -
els. ResNet extracts deep hierarchical features from the data, whereas Autoencoders 
reduce the data to a more compact representation

===== SDATA.2017.171.pdf =====
TITLE_META: untitled
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 8
Data Descriptor: Open University
Learning Analytics dataset
Jakub Kuzilek 1,2, Martin Hlosta 1 & Zdenek Zdrahal 1,2
Learning Analytics focuses on the collection and analysis of learners ’ data to improve their learning
experience by providing informed guidance and to optimise learning materials. To support the research in
this area we have developed a dataset, containing data from courses presented at the Open University
(OU). What makes the dataset unique is the fact that it contains demographic data together with
aggregated clickstream data of students ’ interactions in the Virtual Learning Environment (VLE). This
enables the analysis of student behaviour, represented by their actions. The dataset contains the
information about 22 courses, 32,593 students, their assessment results, and logs of their interactions with
the VLE represented by daily summaries of student clicks ( 10,655,280 entries). The dataset is freely
available at https://analyse.kmi.open.ac.uk/open_dataset under a CC-BY 4.0 license.
Design Type(s) time series design  data integration objective  observation design
Measurement Type(s) learning behavior
Technology Type(s) digital curation
Factor Type(s) temporal_interval
Sample Characteristic(s) Homo sapiens
1Knowledge Media Institute, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK 76 AA, UK. 2CIIRC, Czech
Technical University, Zikova street 1903/4, Prague 166 36 , Czech Republic. Correspondence and requests for
materials should be addressed to J.K. (email: jakub.kuzilek@gmail.com).
OPEN
Received: 20 July 2017
Accepted: 13 October 2017
Published: 28 November 2017
www.nature.com/scientificdata
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 4:170171 | DOI: 10.1038/sdata.2017.171 1
Background & Summary
With the rapid advancement of information technologies, the higher education sector experienced a
massive increase in the amount of student data collected. In addition, Virtual Learning Environments
emerged and moved courses to the Internet. This transfer was further supported by the boom of Massive
Open Online Courses (MOOCs). In the past decade over 200 scienti ﬁc studies investigated the impact of
student data analysis
1. This shows the importance of open datasets, which provide a standardised way to
present and compare results.
To the best of our knowledge, two other open datasets for Learning Analytics exist. The ﬁrst is the
KDD Cup 2010 dataset 2, which provides data in the form of interaction records between students and a
computer-aided-tutoring system. The second dataset is the KDD Cup 2015 dataset 3 extracted from
XuetangX MOOC platform. This dataset contains data about the structure of 40 courses and interactions
between students and VLE. It does not include any demographic and historical data from past courses.
In comparison to the above-mentioned datasets, the Open University Learning Analytics dataset
(OULAD) contains a subset of the OU student data from 2013 and 2014. It includes both student
demographic data and interaction data with the university ’s VLE.
To better understand the data the description of the OU and its learning and teaching system follows.
The Open University is one of the largest distance learning universities worldwide. At present, around
170,000 students are registered in different programs. Teaching materials and other content are delivered
to students via the VLE. Students ’ interactions with the educational materials are recorded and stored in
university data warehouse.
At the OU, courses are called modules. Modules can be presented multiple times during the year. To
distinguish between different presentations of a module, each presentation is named by the year and
month it starts. For example, presentations starting in January ends with A, in February with B and so on;
so that ‘2013J’ means that the presentation started in October 2013.
The university offers several hundred modules. Each of them can be studied as a stand-alone course or
as part of a university programme. No previous quali ﬁcations are required.
During the admission process, students are informed about the Data Protection Policy and Policy on
Ethical use of Student Data for Learning Analytics. They cover the essential information regarding of use
of their personal data. The students are informed that they data are used for academic research purposes
and they might be shared with other researchers. In addition, the OU promises not to release data, which
might be used to identify individual students, this is not the case of OULAD since this dataset is
anonymised and cannot be used to link data with the individual students. At present, the OU does not
provide the possibility to opt-out of data usage for Learning Analytics research.
Students in a module-presentation are organised into study groups of approximately 20 people. Each
group has an assigned tutor, who guides and supports students throughout the module presentation.
Figure 1 depicts the typical structure of one module-presentation. The typical length of presentations
is 9 months. Module resources are available from the VLE system a few weeks before the start of the
presentation. Students can sign-up for the module from a few months before the start of the presentation
until two weeks after the of ﬁcial module start date. Each module includes several assessments. At the end
of the module, there is usually a ﬁnal exam.
As stated before the OULAD is a collection of tabular student data from years 2013 and 2014. Each
table contains different information, which can be linked to data from other tables using identi ﬁer
columns. The data contained in the dataset are structured as shown in Fig. 2. The dataset is student
oriented, thus the student is the central point. Students ’ data includes information about their
demographics and registrations for the modules. For each student-module-presentation triplet, the
dataset contains the results of the students ’ assessments. Student interactions with the VLE are logged as a
summary of their daily activities. The dataset contains 22 module-presentations with 32,593 registered
students and it is freely available at https://analyse.kmi.open.ac.uk/open_dataset. OULAD has been
certiﬁed by the Open Data Institute (http://theodi.org/).
The dataset may be used in various scenarios. It enables evaluation of predictive models for predicting
student assessment results and ﬁnal course results and comparison of models with other models develop
by other researchers. The VLE data enable to study course structure from the learning perspective and the
data itself can be used to evaluate the in ﬂuence of VLE on the learning outcomes.
Figure 1. Typical module structure. Module-presentation content is usually available in VLE couple of weeks
before of ﬁcial module start. During the presentation the students ’ their knowledge is evaluated in series of
assessments, which de ﬁnes the milestones in the module. At the end, there is usually the ﬁnal exam.
www.nature.com/sdata/
SCIENTIFIC DATA | 4:170171 | D

===== Student_Performance_Prediction_Approach_Based_on_Educational_Data_Mining.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Student Performance Prediction Approach Based on Educational Data Mining
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 13
Received 10 October 2023, accepted 20 November 2023, date of publication 23 November 2023,
date of current version 29 November 2023.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2023.3335985
Student Performance Prediction Approach Based
on Educational Data Mining
ZILING CHEN
 , GANG CEN
 , YING WEI, AND ZIFEI LI
School of Information and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University of Science and Technology, Hangzhou 310000, China
Corresponding author: Gang Cen (gcen@163.com)
This work was supported by Zhejiang University of Science and Technology Teaching Research and Reform Key Projects
under Grant 2022-jg15.
ABSTRACT Predicting student performance is crucial for improving students’ future academic
achievements. Within student groups, common characteristics can reveal trends in overall student
learning. Most studies tend to focus on the common characteristics of students but ignore their
individual characteristics. However, individual characteristics are important in promoting student academic
performance because they allow us to understand the unique learning performances of each student.
To address this issue, this paper proposes a student performance prediction approach. First, addressing
the problem of difficulty in effectively dividing the student samples under multi-dimensional discrete data,
we propose a method that combines the relationship matrix-based bipartite network approach (RMBN) with
Louvain clustering. Second, the hybrid neural network model based on a relationship matrix (RMHNN) is
proposed to address the problem that discrete types of features are difficult to fit by algorithms. The results
show that the implementation of the model on real student data can effectively predict student performance
with an accuracy of 93.1% and an F1-score of 90.45%. With the model’s predicted student performance,
educators can provide individualized support and assistance to each student.
INDEX TERMS Performance prediction, data mining, common characteristics, individual characteristics,
relation network.
I. INTRODUCTION
Academic performance is the most important measure of
the quality of college students, serving as the fundamental
criterion for universities to monitor teaching quality and
evaluate students’ academic abilities [1]. In school period,
student’s performance is reflected in both academic and prac-
tical performance. Academic performance refers to students’
performance in various courses, while practical performance
includes students’ performance in research competitions and
on-campus scholarships, among other aspects. Students in the
same college or university have similar test scores at the time
of enrollment. However, a variety of factors can lead to a
gradual widening of performance between students during
their studies. Numerous researchers have conducted exten-
sive studies to address the issues of incomplete assessment
of student performance and the lack of tools for assessing
students’ performance in most universities.
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Sandra Baldassarri.
Numerous studies related to student development have
been published within the field of education. Numerous
studies cover various aspects, including student dropout
rates [2], student profiling [3], [4], [5], monitoring student
academic performance [6], [7], [8], [9], and predicting at-risk
students [10]. In research concerning student dropout rates,
students are typically classified as either ‘‘good’’ or ‘‘poor’’
[11], [12], [13], with targeted interventions aimed at high-risk
student groups. Student profiling studies [14] involve the
creation of student profiles by collecting behavioral and
academic data to enable early detection of students exhibiting
abnormal behavior. Additionally, there have been endeavors
to predict groups of students facing learning difficulties based
on their assignment submissions [15], as well as efforts to
identify students’ learning styles through the analysis of their
academic data characteristics [16].
Most of the research on predicting student performance
focuses on extracting common characteristics among student
groups while neglecting the consideration of individual
characteristics of students. There are three problems with
131260

 2023 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ VOLUME 11, 2023
Z. Chen et al.: Student Performance Prediction Approach Based on Educational Data Mining
these studies. Firstly, in terms of the choice of data objectives
[17], [18], most studies choose to use students’ overall
grades to assess students’ academic performance. However,
this approach ignores the performance of each student in
different subjects, making it difficult to extract individual
characteristics. Secondly, in terms of the choice of research
method, most of the studies employ a supervised learning
approach [19]. Since assessing student learning is a complex
concept, it is difficult for us to accurately measure the
problem with a single target variable. Using an unsupervised
learning approach can more fully utilize all the data features
to mine the individual differences between students. Thirdly,
in terms of student group division [11], [15], [20], most
studies tend to categorize students as ‘‘good’’ or ‘‘poor’’.
While this categorization helps provide early warnings for
students classified as ‘‘poor’’, it is overly broad for students
classified as ‘‘good’’, potentially overlooking individual
differences within this category.
This paper focuses on both individual and common
characteristics of students, aiming to predict students’
academic performance by exploring these characteristics.
Firstly, to address the problem of k-means struggling to effec-
tively cluster student samples in multi-dimensional discrete
data, we propose a method that combines the relationship
matrix-based bipartite network approach (RMBN) with Lou-
vain. Secondly, to tackle the issue that existing studies using
a single objective variable may not accurately assess student
performance, we use a multi-objective assessment method.
We propose RMBN approach. Thirdly, to address the problem
that discrete features are unsuitable for learning within a
feature space based on Euclidean distance, we propose the
hybrid neural network model based on a relationship matrix
(RMHNN). Fourthly, to resolve the concern that existing
research tends to focus on students’ common characteristics
but neglects their individual characteristics, we propose the
student performance prediction approach.
The main contributions of the paper are summarized as
follows:
• We address the difficulty of k-means in effectively
classifying student samples under multi-dimensional
discrete data by combining the proposed RMBN
approach with Louvain.
• We use a multi-objective assessment method and
propose RMBN. By

===== Student_Retention_Using_Educational_Data_Mining_and_Predictive_Analytics_A_Systematic_Literature_Review.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Student Retention Using Educational Data Mining and Predictive Analytics: A Systematic Literature Review
AUTHOR_META: 
PAGES: 24
Received 7 June 2022, accepted 27 June 2022, date of publication 6 July 2022, date of current version 15 July 2022.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1 109/ACCESS.2022.3188767
Student Retention Using Educational Data Mining
and Predictive Analytics: A Systematic
Literature Review
DALIA ABDULKAREEM SHAFIQ
 , MOHSEN MARJANI
 ,
RIYAZ AHAMED ARIYALURAN HABEEB
 , AND DAVID ASIRVATHAM
School of Computer Science (CS), Taylor’s University, Subang Jaya 47500, Malaysia
Corresponding authors: Dalia Abdulkareem Shaﬁq (daliaabdulkareemshaﬁq@sd.taylors.edu.my) and Mohsen Marjani
(mohsen.marjani@taylors.edu.my)
This work was supported by Taylor’s University through the Taylor’s Research Excellence Scholarship 2021 under Grant
IVERSON/2018/SOCIT/001.
ABSTRACT Student retention is an essential measurement metric in education, indicated by retention
rates, which are accumulated as students re-enroll from one academic year to the next. High retention
rates can be obtained if institutions aim to provide appropriate support and teaching methods among
the various practices to prevent students from deferring their studies. To address this pressing challenge
faced by educational institutions, the underlying factors and the methodological aspects of building robust
predictive models are reviewed and scrutinized. Educational Data Mining (EDM) and Learning Analytics
(LA) have been widely adopted for knowledge discovery from educational data sources, improving the
teaching practice, and identifying at-risk students. V arious predictive techniques are applied in LA, such
as Machine Learning (ML), Statistical Analysis, and Deep Learning (DL). To gain an in-depth review of
these techniques, academic publications have been reviewed to highlight their potential to resolve Student
Retention issues in education. Additionally, the paper presents a taxonomy of ML approaches and a
comprehensive review of the success factors and the features that are not indicative of student performance
in three different learning environments: Traditional Learning, Blended Learning, and Online Learning. The
survey reveals that supervised ML and DL techniques are broadly applied in Student Retention. However, the
application of ensemble and unsupervised learning clustering techniques supporting the heterogenous and
homogenous groups of students is generally lacking. Moreover, static and traditional features are commonly
used in student performance, ignoring vital factors such as educators-related, cognitive, and personal data.
Furthermore, the paper highlights open challenges for future research directions.
INDEX TERMS Educational data mining, learning analytics, machine learning, predictive models, student
retention.
I. INTRODUCTION
This section is divided into four major parts, emphasizing
the context of this systematic literature review and the main
research contributions. Firstly, we begin by introducing the
main topic of this review, followed by the subtopics under
the ﬁeld of student retention.
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Kathiravan Srinivasan
.
A. STUDENT RETENTION
Student retention is one of the pressing challenges in higher
education. Retention rate is an essential measurement metric
in education [1], [2]. As students re-enroll from one academic
year to the next high retention rates are obtained [3], [4].
To achieve this, institutions should provide appropriate sup-
port and teaching methods [1] as among the various practices
to enhance student performance [5] and prevent them from
deferring their studies. This area has gained massive attention
72480 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ VOLUME 10, 2022
D. A. Shafiq et al.: Student Retention Using EDM and Predictive Analytics: A Systematic Literature Review
in the education sector over the years as many researchers and
institutions are interested to learn about the factors preventing
students from completing their degrees and what factors do
not [6], [7].
Maintaining a high graduation rate in universities can be
challenging due to poor student retention. General statistics
show that the overall dropout rate for undergraduate college
students is relatively high at 40%, with approximately 30%
of freshmen discontinuing their studies before their second
year [8], [9]. While the reasons for students choosing to
drop out of universities vary widely based on the different
views of student retention in institutions and different data
used, the issue is still a major concern [10], especially for
higher education institutions looking for enriched retention
strategies. Many empirical and theoretical studies are focused
on exploring the determinants that could lead students to drop
out. One of the major factors identiﬁed by current studies is
ﬁnancial concerns [11], [12], due to costly education or low
education funding.
Low student retention in universities can affect students
ﬁnancially [13]. As student discontinue their studies, a stu-
dent’s education loan must be paid even if the student fails to
graduate, which leads to a low graduation rate in higher edu-
cation institutions. As the demand increases for employing
highly qualiﬁed students, failing to meet students’ expecta-
tions can result in low-income jobs. Furthermore, low reten-
tion rates can be an indicator of the failure of institutions to
accomplish their mission [14]. If a university fails to prepare
young mindsets for the business world, this can lead to a
massive loss in human capital [13] as fewer professionals and
practical skills are produced by universities.
A high retention rate can bring many advantages to not just
students but to educators and parents as well. For example,
if the student is not active during the coursework activi-
ties prepared by lecturers, then an analysis of the student’s
progress can conclude practical points which help educators
to reﬁne their teaching methods, and materials for better
student engagement and learning. A student that exhibits low
progress or is likely to leave the university due to issues
and other aspects are identiﬁed as ‘‘at-risk’’ students [14].
Prediction of these students as early as possible can bring
many beneﬁts and helpful tools to institutions and students,
such as an early warning system [10], [15], [16] generated
to resolve issues that might lead students to defer or dis-
continue their studies. Additionally, predicting the successful
students can help educators identify the characteristics of an
outstanding student, and these traits can be established as a
set of principles that can be provided for students when they
commence in a university.
Many institutions are turning to ﬁne and high-tech solu-
tions that are oriented toward data and analysis, known
as Predictive Analytics, more speciﬁcally Learning Ana-
lytics. The purpose of employing analytics in educa-
tion is to explore 

===== sustainability-14-14795-v2.pdf =====
TITLE_META: Students' Academic Performance and Engagement Prediction in a Virtual Learning Environment Using Random Forest with Data Balancing
AUTHOR_META: Khurram Jawad, Muhammad Arif Shah and Muhammad Tahir
PAGES: 15
Citation: Jawad, K.; Shah, M.A.;
Tahir, M. Students’ Academic
Performance and Engagement
Prediction in a Virtual Learning
Environment Using Random Forest
with Data Balancing. Sustainability
2022, 14, 14795. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su142214795
Academic Editor: Hao-Chiang
Koong Lin
Received: 25 September 2022
Accepted: 1 November 2022
Published: 9 November 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
Students’ Academic Performance and Engagement Prediction in
a Virtual Learning Environment Using Random Forest with
Data Balancing
Khurram Jawad 1,*, Muhammad Arif Shah 2 and Muhammad Tahir 1,*
1 College of Computing and Informatics, Saudi Electronic University, Riyadh 11673, Saudi Arabia
2 Department of IT & Computer Science, Pak-Austria Fachhochshule Institute of Applied
Sciences & Technology, Haripur 22650, Pakistan
* Correspondence: k.allo@seu.edu.sa (K.J.); m.tahir@seu.edu.sa (M.T.)
Abstract: Virtual learning environment (VLE) is vital in the current age and is being extensively used
around the world for knowledge sharing. VLE is helping the distance-learning process, however, it
is a challenge to keep students engaged all the time as compared to face-to-face lectures. Students
do not participate actively in academic activities, which affects their learning curves. This study
proposes the solution of analyzing students’ engagement and predicting their academic performance
using a random forest classiﬁer in conjunction with the SMOTE data-balancing technique. The Open
University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD) was used in the study to simulate the teaching–
learning environment. Data from six different time periods was noted to create students’ proﬁles
comprised of assessments scores and engagements. This helped to identify early weak points and
preempted the students performance for improvement through proﬁling. The proposed methodology
demonstrated 5% enhanced performance with SMOTE data balancing as opposed to without using it.
Similarly, the AUC under the ROC curve is 0.96, which shows the signiﬁcance of the proposed model.
Keywords: student academic performance; virtual learning environment; random forest; SMOTE
1. Introduction
E-Learning systems confront a plethora of challenges but the most considerable of
them is the lack of students’ interest in a variety of activities. In this scenario, if students’
engagements and academic performance are predicted, it will help to achieve the basic
purpose of distance learning. In a virtual learning environment (VLE), a ginormous amount
of data is produced by the participation of students every day. This trove of data can be
utilized for student proﬁling as well as generating trends and hidden patterns. The focus
of this study is to predict the academic performance and engagement of students in VLEs
through student proﬁling using artiﬁcial-intelligence and machine-learning techniques.
The freely available Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD) is used for
this purpose. In the initial stages, students’ course information is taken from VLEs, which
is preprocessed and cleansed. Our built models are trained on the extracted information
and tested on new data that will end up in model evaluation. The model evaluation and
building is conducted iteratively until the best performance is revealed.
Information-communications-technology (ICT)-based tools have made VLEs more
reliable and, therefore, more universities are now offering online education. Particularly,
due to COVID-19, higher education institutions in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
around the world have shifted their course offerings to e-learning.
In order to guide analytics in the e-learning paradigm, it is important to have tech-
niques that can provide true analysis of the generated data from students’ interactions with
the system. Students’ interactions can be revealed and associated with their performance
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795. https://doi.org/10.3390/su142214795 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795 2 of 15
on a particular course. The primary objective of the proposed model is to predict stu-
dents’ academic performance and their engagement in various activities through students’
proﬁling in VLE using random forest and data balancing.
In an e-learning environment, students usually do not take an interest in assessment
and learning activities. The proposed model will be used to increase the participation level
of students by letting them know about their projected performance in advance. Particularly,
it will help students improve their academic performance through active participation in
academic activities. Development of such models will certainly be useful in identifying
social, environment and behavioral factors affecting students’ overall performance in
e-learning environments.
The primary contributions of this article include the following:
1. We construct students’ proﬁles by combining their assessment scores and engagement
with a VLE.
2. We utilize random forest in conjunction with a data-balancing technique to predict
the students’ academic performance from their proﬁles.
3. We investigate the performance of our proposed model by exploiting data from six
different intervals, including the data for ﬁrst 120 days, 150 days, 180 days, 210 days,
230 days, and 260 days.
2. Related Work
Traditional education and computer-based education are the two educational environ-
ments in practice today across academia, where the latter is well-known as e-learning [1].
Educational institutions around the world are now rapidly moving towards e-learning, with
novel learning strategies that can help improve learning methodologies [2]. Innovation in
information and communication technology tools have played a critical role in the growth
of web-based teaching and learning processes [3], particularly in the post-COVID-19 sce-
nario. E-learning systems have not only become an integral part of teaching over the web
but also play a fundamental role in aiding face-to-face student–teacher sessions [4]. Transi-
tion from traditional learning environments to e-learning environments has created many
challenges, particularly the lack of interest of the students, which affects their academic
performance. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to develop techniques which can
identify reasons and forecast students’ projected performance. To achieve this, a number of
studies [5–10] have been conducted in the recent past to explore the e-learning domain.
Ghassen Ben Brahim [11] extracted an 86-dimensional feature space where only in-
formative features were exploited by vario
